\input texinfo.tex
@setfilename tm-mh-e_en.info

@titlepage
@title{tm-mh-e 7.71 Reference Manual}
@author{MORIOKA Tomohiko}
@end titlepage

@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)

@menu
* Introduction::                What is tm-mh-e?
* mh-folder-mode::              Extension for folder-mode
* Automatic MIME Preview::      Inline display for MIME message
* MIME-Edit::                   Composing MIME message
* Concept Index::               
* Command Index::               
* Variable Index::              
@end menu

@node Introduction, mh-folder-mode, Top, Top
@chapter What is tm-mh-e?

tm-mh-e is a mh-e extender for MIME features using tm.

tm-mh-e extends following features:

	- automatic MIME preview using tm-view

	- composing MIME message using tm-edit


@node mh-folder-mode, Automatic MIME Preview, Introduction, Top
@chapter Extension for folder-mode

[@key{M-t}]	It is the toggle whether to do automatic MIME preview or not.

[@key{v}]	Enter @code{mime/viewer-mode} to view a message.

[@key{.}]	Display current message.

[@key{,}]	Display current message with showing all fields.

[@key{M-,}]	Display current raw message.

@code{mime/viewer-mode} is a major-mode to view and navigate MIME
message. In this mode, you can move in a message or play a content,
interactively. (@pxref{(tm_en.info)MIME navigation})


@node Automatic MIME Preview, MIME-Edit, mh-folder-mode, Top
@chapter Inline display for MIME message

``Automatic MIME preview'' feature is available in tm-mh-e. In
automatic MIME preview mode, when reading an article in summary mode,
tm-mh-e displays preview buffer processed by tm-view instead of raw
show buffer. (@pxref{(tm_en.info)tm-view})

Therefore if an article is encoded by Quoted-Printable or Base64, a
decoded article is displayed. Or rich text article is automatic
formated. Of course, multipart article is dealt with correctly.

Different from using metamail, speaker does not roar just then read an
article includes audio content, video player does not play just then
read an article includes video content, it does not do anonymous ftp
or send mail when read an article includes external-message. These
contents are played when you do decoding command in preview buffer.

In addition, in XEmacs, images are displayed in preview buffer as same
as text.

However if you use a slow machine, or are just really impatient, you
can stop automatic MIME preview.


@defvar tm-mh-e/automatic-mime-preview

If it is not-nil, tm-mh-e is in automatic MIME preview mode.


@end defvar

@node MIME-Edit, Concept Index, Automatic MIME Preview, Top
@chapter Composing MIME message

If using mime-setup (@pxref{(tm_en.info)Setting}), you can edit MIME
message in mh-letter-mode using tm-edit. (@pxref{(tm_en.info)tm-edit})

@node Concept Index, Command Index, MIME-Edit, Top
@chapter Concept Index

@printindex cp


@node Command Index, Variable Index, Concept Index, Top
@chapter Command Index

@printindex fn


@node Variable Index,  , Command Index, Top
@chapter Variable Index

@printindex vr

@summarycontents
@contents

@bye
