@c $Id: tm-view-cs=en.texi,v 1.1.1.1 1996/12/18 22:43:52 steve Exp $

@node content-subject, content-header, MIME display, MIME display
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection content-subject
@cindex content-subject

content-subject is a part to display abstract for the content. It is
placed in top of content.

In default, it is displayed following design:

@example
        [1.3 test (text/plain)]
@end example

First number field represents position of a content in the message. It
is called `content-number'. It can be considered as the chapter number
in the message.

Second string part represents title. It is created by following:

@itemize @bullet
@item name paramater or x-name parameter in Content-Type field
@item Content-Description field or Subject field
@item filename of uuencode
@end itemize

If they are not exists, space is displayed.

Third parenthesis part represents content-type/subtype of the content. 
If it is non-MIME part, @code{nil} is displayed.

Content-subject is used like icon when content-header and content-body
are hidden. For example,

@example
        [2  (image/gif)]
@end example

if you press `v' key, GIF image is displayed.


@defvr{Variable} mime-viewer/content-subject-omitting-Content-Type-list

List of content-type. If content-type of a content is a member of this
list, its content-subject is not displayed.

This variable is referenced by function
@code{mime-viewer/default-content-subject-function}.
@end defvr


@deffn{Function} mime-viewer/default-content-subject-function rcnum cinfo ctype params subj

Default value of the variable
@code{mime-viewer/content-subject-function}.  It refers variable
@code{mime-viewer/content-subject-omitting-Content-Type-list}.
@end deffn


@defvar mime-viewer/content-subject-function rcnum cinfo ctype params subj

Variable to specify content-subject display function. Default value is
the function @code{mime-viewer/default-content-subject-function}.
@end defvar
