@c $Id: tm-view-cb=en.texi,v 1.1.1.1 1996/12/18 22:43:52 steve Exp $

@node content-body, content-separator, content-header, MIME display
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsubsection content-body
@cindex content-body

Content-body represents content of the message. tm-view does not
display raw content body. For example, if a content has binary, it is
hidden. If a content has richtext, it is formated. Namely content body
is hidden or formated.

Function @code{mime-viewer/body-visible-p} is a judge function whether
content-body of a content is displayed. If it returns @code{nil},
content-body is hidden. In default, it returns non-@code{nil} when
content-type of a content is a member of variable
@code{mime-viewer/default-showing-Content-Type-list}.

When content-body of a content is displayed, content-body is formated
by content-filter. Content-filter is searched from variable
@code{mime-viewer/content-filter-alist}. At this time, major-mode of
the article buffer is used as the key.

If it is not found, function @code{mime-viewer/default-content-filter}
is called.


@defvar mime-viewer/default-showing-Content-Type-list

List of content-type. If content-type of a content is a member of this
variable, its body is displayed.
@end defvar


@deffn{Function} mime-viewer/body-visible-p rcnum cinfo &optional ctype

Return non-@code{nil}, if content-type of a content is displayed.
@var{rcnum} is reversed-content-number of a content. @var{cinfo} is
content-info of the message. If you know content-type of a content,
you can specify it as argument @var{ctype}.
@end deffn


@defvar mime-viewer/content-filter-alist

Association-list whose key is major-mode of a article buffer, value is
content-filter.
@end defvar


@deffn{Function} mime-viewer/default-content-filter rcnum cinfo ctype params subj

It is called when content-body of a content should be displayed and
content-filter is not found in @code{mime-viewer/content-filter-alist}.

In default, it does nothing.
@end deffn
