\input texinfo.tex
@c{-*-tm manual-*-}
@setfilename tm_en.info
@settitle tm manual

@titlepage
@title tm Manual (English Version)
@author by MORIOKA Tomohiko
@code{$Id: tm_en.texi,v 1.1.1.1 1996/12/18 22:43:52 steve Exp $}
@end titlepage


@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)
@top tm 7.32 Reference manual

@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@ifinfo
This file documents tm, a MIME package for GNU Emacs.

@end ifinfo

@menu
* Introduction::   What is tm?
* Emacs Versions:: Differences between each emacs variants.
* Setting::

* tm-MUA::         Extension of mh-e, GNUS, RMAIL and VM
* tm-mh-e: (tm-mh-e_en.info).   mh-e
* tm-gnus: (tm-gnus_en.info).   GNUS and Gnus
* tm-rmail: (tm-rmail_en.info). RMAIL
* tm-vm: (tm-vm_en.info).       VM

* tm-view::        MIME message navigator.
* tm-edit::        MIME message composer.
* encoded-word::   multi lingual characters in message header
* customize::

* Bug report::     How to report bug and about mailing list of tm.

* Concept Index::
* Command Index::
* Variable Index::
@end menu


@node Introduction, Emacs Versions, Top, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter What is tm?
@cindex tm

The tm package is a set of modules to enjoy MIME on GNU Emacs.  Using tm,
you can

@itemize @bullet
@item playback or view the MIME messages using tm-view
@item compose MIME message using tm-edit
@item use the enhanced MIME features with mh-e, GNUS, RMAIL and VM
@end itemize

and more.


@section List of modules
@cindex List of modules

The tm package includes the modules listed below.

@itemize @minus
@item @strong{tm-view:}   MIME viewer
@item @strong{tm-edit:}   MIME composer
@item @strong{tm-def:}    definition module for tm
        @item @strong{tm-mh-e:}  tm-MUA for mh-e
        @item @strong{tm-gnus:}  tm-MUA for GNUS
        @item @strong{tm-rmail:} tm-MUA for RMAIL
        @item @strong{tm-vm:}    tm-MUA for VM
@item @strong{tm-setup:} tm-MUA setup module
@item @strong{mime-setup:} MIME setup module
@end itemize


@node Emacs Versions, Setting, Introduction, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Considerations for each emacs variants
@cindex Considerations for each emacs variants

@section original GNU Emacs 18

I can not guarantee, but you may use US-ASCII only.

@section NEmacs, NEpoch

ISO-2022-JP and US-ASCII can be used if you use NEmacs.

@section original GNU Emacs 19

US-ASCII and ISO-8859-1 can be used if you use the original Emacs
19.*.

When emacs is running with own window in X window environment, tm-rich
displays multi face for text/richtext and text/enriched richtext
messages.

@section Mule

Mule can handle the multi-lingual text.  With Mule, tm supports
ISO-2022-JP, ISO-2022-JP-2, US-ASCII, ISO-8859-1..9, ISO-2022-CN,
ISO-2022-KR, EUC-KR, etc.  You can also add or change
encoding/decoding for character sets by mime/set-charset-and-encoding
function.

When Mule 2.* is running with own window in X window environment,
tm-rich displays multi face for text/richtext and text/enriched
richtext messages.

@section XEmacs

US-ASCII and ISO-8859-1 can be used if you use the XEmacs.

In future, we will support inline image.


@node Setting, tm-MUA, Emacs Versions, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Setting
@cindex Setting

In the tm package, two files, mime-setup.el and tm-setup.el, are
provided to ease the setup. The mime-setup.el is used for the whole MIME
related setup including MIME encoding using tm-edit.el, while tm-setup is
used to set up tm-MUA only.

@menu
* mime-setup::     normal setting
* tm-setup::       setting not to use tm-edit
* tm-vm::          setting for VM
* manual setting::
@end menu


@node mime-setup, tm-setup, Setting, Setting
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section mime-setup.el
@cindex mime-setup.el

@lisp
(load "mime-setup")
@end lisp

will perform various settings of MIME.  As mime-setup.el loads
tm-setup.el, you do not need to load tm-setup.el when you use
mime-setup.el.


@subsection variable of mime-setup.el

@subsection SuperCite
@cindex SuperCite

@defvar mime-setup-use-sc

If it is not nil, mime-setup.el sets up SuperCite using sc-setup.el.
Its default value is nil.

If you set up SuperCite, you need the SuperCite package.
@end defvar


@subsubsection signature
@cindex signature

You can set up the "automatic signature selection tool" using
mime-setup. If you want to automatically select the signature file
depending on how the message headers show, add lines like shown below
to your .emacs (Refer to the reference manual of signature.el for more
details).

@lisp
(setq signature-file-alist
      '((("Newsgroups" . "jokes")       . "~/.signature-jokes")
        (("Newsgroups" . ("zxr" "nzr")) . "~/.signature-sun")
        (("To" . ("ishimaru" "z-suzuki")) . "~/.signature-sun")
        (("To" . "tea")                 . "~/.signature-jokes")
        (("To" . ("sim" "oku" "takuo")) . "~/.signature-formal")
        ))
@end lisp


@defvar mime-setup-use-signature

If it is not nil, mime-setup.el sets up for signature.el. Its default
value is t.
@end defvar


@defvar mime-setup-signature-key-alist

It defines key to bind signature inserting command for each
major-mode. Its default value is following:

@lisp
	((mail-mode . "\C-c\C-w"))
@end lisp

If you want to change, please rewrite it. For example:

@lisp
(set-alist 'mime-setup-signature-key-alist 'news-reply-mode "\C-c\C-w")
@end lisp

@end defvar


@defvar mime-setup-default-signature-key

If key to bind signature inserting command for a major-mode is not
found from mime-setup-signature-key-alist, its value is used as key.
Its default value is ``\C-c\C-s''.
@end defvar


@subsection Notices for GNUS
@cindex GNUS

When mime-setup.el sets up for signature.el, it sets variable
@code{gnus-signature-file} to nil. Therefore GNUS does not insert
signature automatically when it is sending a message. Reason of this
setting is following:

GNUS inserts signature after tm-edit.el composed as MIME
message. Therefore signature inserted by GNUS is not processed as a
valid MIME part. In particular, for multipart message, signature
places in outside of MIME part. So MIME MUA might not display it.

Other notice is key bind. In historical reason, key bind to insert
signature is @key{C-c C-s} (like mh-e) instead of @key{C-c C-w}. If
you change to GNUS's default, please set following:

@lisp
(set-alist 'mime-setup-signature-key-alist 'news-reply-mode "\C-c\C-w")
@end lisp


@node tm-setup, tm-vm, mime-setup, Setting
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section tm-setup

tm-setup.el only sets up tm-MUAs.  You do not need to explicitly load
tm-setup.el if you are using mime-setup.el for your setup.
tm-setup.el is useful when you do not want to use mime-setup.el but
want to set up tm-MUAs.

@lisp
(load "tm-setup")
@end lisp


@node tm-vm, manual setting, tm-setup, Setting
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section vm

If you use vm, please insert following in ~/.vm:

@lisp
(require 'tm-vm)
@end lisp

Notice: If you use BBDB, please insert @code{(require 'tm-vm)}
@strong{after} @code{(bbdb-insinuate-vm)}.


@node manual setting,  , tm-vm, Setting
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Setting up without loading provided setup files

You may find the valuable hints in tm-setup.el if you want to set up
MIME environment without loading the tm-provided setup files.


@node tm-MUA, tm-view, Setting, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter tm-MUA
@cindex tm-MUA

``tm-MUA'' is a generic name of the modules which enhance the MIME
functions of MUA like mh-e, GNUS, and RMAIL etc.

The current version of tm provides the following tm-MUA.

@itemize @minus
@item @strong{tm-mh-e:}  tm-MUA for mh-e
@item @strong{tm-gnus:}  tm-MUA for GNUS
@item @strong{tm-rmail:} tm-MUA for RMAIL
@item @strong{tm-vm:}    tm-MUA for VM
@end itemize

You can find the detailed explanations of these modules in the
following sections.


@section Summary mode

If you are using tm-MUA, the following functions are added to the
Summary mode of the MUA.

@table @kbd 
@item @key{M-t}
toggles decoding of MIME headers
@item @key{v}
enters @code{mime/viewer-mode} to view a message
@end table

Notice: In tm-vm, key to enter @code{mime/viewer-mode} is @key{Z}
instead of @key{v}. In tm-mh-e, tm-vm and tm-gnus in Gnus 3.15 or
later, preview buffer of @code{mime/viewer-mode} displays
automatically in default setting.

@menu
* tm-mh-e: (tm-mh-e_en.info).
* tm-gnus: (tm-gnus_en.info).
* tm-rmail: (tm-rmail_en.info).
* tm-vm: (tm-vm_en.info).
* tm-cmail: (tm-cmail_en.info).
@end menu


@include tm-view=en.texi

@include tm-edit-en.texi

@include tm-ew=en.texi

@include tm-util=en.texi


@node Bug report, Concept Index, customize, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter How to report bug and about mailing list of tm
@cindex bug report
@cindex mailing list

Please report tm bugs you find to fj.editor.emacs or send a mail to:

@itemize @bullet
@item Japanese or English

        <bug-tm-ja@@chamonix.jaist.ac.jp>

@item English

        <bug-tm-en@@chamonix.jaist.ac.jp>
@end itemize

Via tm ML, You can report bugs of tm, obtain the latest release of tm
package, and discuss the future enhancements to tm.  To join tm ML,
send a mail to

@itemize @bullet
@item Japanese

        <tm-ja-admin@@chamonix.jaist.ac.jp>

@item English

        <tm-en-admin@@chamonix.jaist.ac.jp>
@end itemize

Since the user registration is manually done, please write
the mail body in human-recognizable language. (^_^)


@node Concept Index, Command Index, Bug report, Top
@unnumbered Concept Index

@printindex cp


@node Command Index, Variable Index, Concept Index, Top
@unnumbered Command and Function Index

@printindex fn


@node Variable Index, , Command Index, Top
@unnumbered Variable Index

@printindex vr

@bye
