        \input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ../../info/internals.info
@settitle XEmacs Internals Manual
@c %**end of header

@ifinfo
@dircategory XEmacs Editor
@direntry
* Internals: (internals).       XEmacs Internals Manual.
@end direntry

Edition History:

Created November 1995 (?) by Ben Wing.
XEmacs Internals Manual Version 1.0, March, 1996.
XEmacs Internals Manual Version 1.1, March, 1997.
XEmacs Internals Manual Version 1.4, March, 2001.
XEmacs Internals Manual Version 21.5, October, 2004.
@c Please REMEMBER to update edition number in *four* places in this file,
@c including adding a line above.

Copyright @copyright{} 1992 - 2004 Ben Wing.
Copyright @copyright{} 1996, 1997 Sun Microsystems.
Copyright @copyright{} 1994 - 1998, 2002, 2003 Free Software Foundation.
Copyright @copyright{} 1994, 1995 Board of Trustees, University of Illinois.


Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

@ignore
Permission is granted to process this file through TeX and print the
results, provided the printed document carries copying permission notice
identical to this one except for the removal of this paragraph (this
paragraph not being relevant to the printed manual).

@end ignore
Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided that the
entire resulting derived work is distributed under the terms of a
permission notice identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that this permission notice may be stated in a translation
approved by the Foundation.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' is included exactly as
in the original, and provided that the entire resulting derived work is
distributed under the terms of a permission notice identical to this
one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' may be
included in a translation approved by the Free Software Foundation
instead of in the original English.
@end ifinfo

@c Combine indices.
@synindex cp fn
@syncodeindex vr fn
@syncodeindex ky fn
@syncodeindex pg fn
@syncodeindex tp fn

@setchapternewpage odd
@finalout

@titlepage
@title XEmacs Internals Manual
@subtitle Version 21.5, October 2004

@author Ben Wing
@sp 1

Improvements by

@sp 1

@author Stephen Turnbull
@author Martin Buchholz
@author Hrvoje Niksic
@author Matthias Neubauer
@author Olivier Galibert
@author Andy Piper


@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1fill

@noindent
Copyright @copyright{} 1992 - 2004 Ben Wing. @*
Copyright @copyright{} 1996, 1997 Sun Microsystems. @*
Copyright @copyright{} 1994 - 1998, 2002, 2003 Free Software Foundation. @*
Copyright @copyright{} 1994, 1995 Board of Trustees, University of Illinois.

@sp 2
Version 21.5 @*
October 2004.@*

Permission is granted to make and distribute verbatim copies of this
manual provided the copyright notice and this permission notice are
preserved on all copies.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute modified versions of this
manual under the conditions for verbatim copying, provided also that the
section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' is included
exactly as in the original, and provided that the entire resulting
derived work is distributed under the terms of a permission notice
identical to this one.

Permission is granted to copy and distribute translations of this manual
into another language, under the above conditions for modified versions,
except that the section entitled ``GNU General Public License'' may be
included in a translation approved by the Free Software Foundation
instead of in the original English.
@end titlepage
@page

@node Top, Introduction, (dir), (dir)

@ifinfo
This Info file contains v21.5 of the XEmacs Internals Manual, October 2004.
@end ifinfo

@ignore
Don't update this by hand!!!!!!
Use C-u C-c C-u m (aka C-u M-x texinfo-master-list).
NOTE: This command does not include the Index:: menu entry.
You must add it by hand.

Here are some useful Lisp routines for quickly Texinfo-izing text that
has been formatted into ASCII lists and tables.

(defun list-to-texinfo (b e)
  "Convert the selected region from an ASCII list to a Texinfo list."
  (interactive "r")
  (save-restriction
    (narrow-to-region b e)
    (goto-char (point-min))
    (let ((dash-type "^ *-+ +")
	  ;; allow single-letter numbering or roman numerals
	  (letter-type "^ *[[(]?\\([a-zA-Z]\\|[IVXivx]+\\)[]).] +")
	  (num-type "^ *[[(]?[0-9]+[]).] +")
	  dash regexp)
      (save-excursion
	(re-search-forward "\\s-*")
	(cond ((looking-at dash-type) (setq regexp dash-type dash t))
	      ((looking-at letter-type) (setq regexp letter-type))
	      ((looking-at num-type) (setq regexp num-type))
	      ((re-search-forward num-type nil t) (setq regexp num-type))
	      ((re-search-forward letter-type nil t) (setq regexp letter-type))
	      ((re-search-forward dash-type nil t)
	       (setq regexp dash-type dash t))
	      (t (error "No table entries?"))))
      (if dash (insert "@itemize @bullet\n")
	(insert "@enumerate\n"))
      (re-search-forward regexp nil 'limit)
      (while (not (eobp))
	(delete-region (point-at-bol) (point))
	(insert "@item\n")
	;; move forward over any text following the dash to not screw
	;; up remove-spacing.
	(forward-line 1)
	(let ((p (point)))
	  (or (re-search-forward regexp nil t)
	      (goto-char (point-max)))
	  ;; trick to avoid using a marker
	  (save-excursion
	    ;; back up so as not to affect the line we're on (beginning of
	    ;; next entry)
	    (forward-line -1)
	    (remove-spacing p (point)))))
      (beginning-of-line)
      (if dash (insert "@end itemize\n")
	(insert "@end enumerate\n")))))

(defun remove-spacing (b e)
  "Remove leading space from the selected region.
This finds the maximum leading blank area common to all lines in the region.
This includes all lines any part of which are in the region."
  (interactive "r")
  (save-excursion
    (let ((min 999999)
	  seen)
      (goto-char e)
      (end-of-line)
      (setq e (point))
      (goto-char b)
      (beginning-of-line)
      (setq b (point))
      (while (< (point) e)
	(cond ((looking-at "^\\s-+")
	       (goto-char (match-end 0))
	       (setq min (min min (current-column))
		     seen t))
	      ((looking-at "^\\s-*$"))
	      (t (setq min 0)))
	(forward-line 1))
      (when (and seen (> min 0))
	(goto-char e)
	(untabify b e)
	;; we are at end of line already.
	(if (not (= (point) (point-at-eol)))
	    (error "Logic error"))
	;; Pad line with spaces if necessary (it may be just a blank line)
	(if (< (current-column) min)
	    (insert-char ?\  (- min (current-column)))
	  (beginning-of-line)
	  (forward-char min))
	(kill-rectangle b (point))))))

(defun table-to-texinfo (b e)
  "Convert the selected region from an ASCII table to a Texinfo table.
Assumes entries are separated by a blank line, and the first sexp in
each entry is the table heading."
  (interactive "r")
  (save-restriction
    (narrow-to-region b e)
    (goto-char (point-min))
    (insert "@table @code\n")
    (while (not (eobp))
      ;; remember where we want to insert the @item.
      ;; delete the spacing first since inserting the @item may create
      ;; a line with no spacing, if there is text following the heading on
      ;; the same line.
      (let ((beg (point)))
	;; removing the space and inserting the @item will change the
	;; position of the end of the region, so to make it easy on us
	;; leave point at end so it will be adjusted.
	(forward-line 1)
	(let ((beg2 (point)))
	  (or (re-search-forward "^$" nil t)
	      (goto-char (point-max)))
	  (backward-char 1)
	  (remove-spacing beg2 (point)))
	(ignore-errors (forward-char 2))
	(save-excursion
	  (goto-char beg)
	  (insert "@item ")
	  (forward-sexp)
	  (delete-char)
	  (insert "\n"))))
    (beginning-of-line)
    (insert "@end table\n")))

A useful Lisp routine for adding markup based on conventions used in plain
text files; see doc string below.

(defun convert-text-to-texinfo (&optional no-narrow)
  "Convert text to Texinfo.
If the region is active, do the region; otherwise, go from point to the end
of the buffer.  This query-replaces for various kinds of conventions used
in text: @code{} surrounded by ` and ' or followed by a (); @strong{}
surrounded by *'s; @file{} something that looks like a file name."
  (interactive)
  (if (region-active-p)
      (save-restriction
	(narrow-to-region (region-beginning) (region-end))
	(convert-comments-to-texinfo t))
    (let ((p (point))
	  (case-replace nil))
      (query-replace-regexp "`\\([^']+\\)'\\([^']\\)" "@code{\\1}\\2" nil)
      (goto-char p)
      (query-replace-regexp "\\(\\Sw\\)\\*\\(\\(?:\\s_\\|\\sw\\)+\\)\\*\\([^A-Za-z.}]\\)" "\\1@strong{\\2}\\3" nil)
      (goto-char p)
      (query-replace-regexp "\\(\\(\\s_\\|\\sw\\)+()\\)\\([^}]\\)" "@code{\\1}\\3" nil)
      (goto-char p)
      (query-replace-regexp "\\(\\(\\s_\\|\\sw\\)+\\.[A-Za-z]+\\)\\([^A-Za-z.}]\\)" "@file{\\1}\\3" nil)
      )))

Macro the generate the "Future Work" section from a title; put
point at beginning.

(defalias 'make-future (read-kbd-macro
"<S-end> <f3> <home> @node SPC <end> RET @section SPC <f4> <home> <up> <C-right> <right> Future SPC Work SPC - - SPC <home> <down> <C-right> <right> Future SPC Work SPC - - SPC <end> RET @cindex SPC future SPC work, SPC <f4> C-r , RET C-x C-x M-l RET @cindex SPC <f4> <home> <C-right> <S-end> M-l , SPC future SPC work RET"))

Similar but generates a "Discussion" section.

(defalias 'make-discussion (read-kbd-macro
"<S-end> <f3> <home> @node SPC <end> RET @section SPC <f4> <home> <up> <C-right> <right> Discussion SPC - - SPC <home> <down> <C-right> <right> Discussion SPC - - SPC <end> RET @cindex SPC discussion, SPC <f4> C-r , RET C-x C-x M-l RET @cindex SPC <f4> <home> <C-right> <S-end> M-l , SPC discussion RET"))

Similar but generates an "Old Future Work" section.

(defalias 'make-old-future (read-kbd-macro
"<S-end> <f3> <home> @node SPC <end> RET @section SPC <f4> <home> <up> <C-right> <right> Old SPC Future SPC Work SPC - - SPC <home> <down> <C-right> <right> Old SPC Future SPC Work SPC - - SPC <end> RET @cindex SPC old SPC future SPC work, SPC <f4> C-r , RET C-x C-x M-l RET @cindex SPC <f4> <home> <C-right> <S-end> M-l , SPC old SPC future SPC work RET"))

Similar but generates a general section.

(defalias 'make-section (read-kbd-macro
"<S-end> <f3> <home> @node SPC <end> RET @section SPC <f4> RET @cindex SPC C-SPC C-g <f4> C-x C-x M-l <home> <down>"))

Similar but generates a general subsection.

(defalias 'make-subsection (read-kbd-macro
"<S-end> <f3> <home> @node SPC <end> RET @subsection SPC <f4> RET @cindex SPC C-SPC C-g <f4> C-x C-x M-l <home> <down>"))
@end ignore

@menu
* Introduction::                Overview of this manual.
* Authorship of XEmacs::        
* A History of Emacs::          Times, dates, important events.
* The XEmacs Split::            
* XEmacs from the Outside::     A broad conceptual overview.
* The Lisp Language::           An overview.
* XEmacs from the Perspective of Building::  
* Build-Time Dependencies::     
* The Modules of XEmacs::       
* The Build Configuration System::
* Rules When Writing New C Code::  
* Regression Testing XEmacs::   
* CVS Techniques::              
* XEmacs from the Inside::      
* Basic Types::                 
* Low-Level Allocation::        
* The XEmacs Object System (Abstractly Speaking)::  
* How Lisp Objects Are Represented in C::  
* Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp::  
* The Lisp Reader and Compiler::  
* Evaluation; Stack Frames; Bindings::  
* Symbols and Variables::       
* Buffers::                     
* Text::                        
* Multilingual Support::        
* Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows::  
* The Redisplay Mechanism::     
* Extents::                     
* Faces::                       
* Glyphs::                      
* Specifiers::                  
* Menus::                       
* Events and the Event Loop::   
* Asynchronous Events; Quit Checking::  
* Lstreams::                    
* Subprocesses::                
* Interface to MS Windows::     
* Interface to the X Window System::  
* Dumping::                     
* Future Work::                 
* Future Work Discussion::      
* Old Future Work::             
* Index::                       

@detailmenu
 --- The Detailed Node Listing ---

A History of Emacs

* Through Version 18::          Unification prevails.
* Epoch::                       An early graphical split of GNU Emacs.
* Lucid Emacs::                 One version 19 Emacs.
* GNU Emacs 19::                The other version 19 Emacs.
* GNU Emacs 20::                The other version 20 Emacs.
* XEmacs::                      The continuation of Lucid Emacs.

The Modules of XEmacs

* A Summary of the Various XEmacs Modules::  
* Low-Level Modules::           
* Basic Lisp Modules::          
* Modules for Standard Editing Operations::  
* Modules for Interfacing with the File System::  
* Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System::  
* Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System::  

Rules When Writing New C Code

* Introduction to Writing C Code::  
* Writing New Modules::         
* Working with Lisp Objects::   
* Writing Lisp Primitives::     
* Writing Good Comments::       
* Adding Global Lisp Variables::  
* Writing Macros::              
* Proper Use of Unsigned Types::  
* Major Textual Changes::       
* Debugging and Testing::       

Major Textual Changes

* Great Integral Type Renaming::  
* Text/Char Type Renaming::     

Regression Testing XEmacs

* How to Regression-Test::      
* Modules for Regression Testing::  

CVS Techniques

* Merging a Branch into the Trunk::  

Low-Level Allocation

* Basic Heap Allocation::       
* Stack Allocation::            
* Dynamic Arrays::              
* Allocation by Blocks::        
* Modules for Allocation::      

Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp

* Introduction to Allocation::  
* Garbage Collection::          
* GCPROing::                    
* Garbage Collection - Step by Step::  
* Integers and Characters::     
* Allocation from Frob Blocks::  
* lrecords::                    
* Low-level allocation::        
* Cons::                        
* Vector::                      
* Bit Vector::                  
* Symbol::                      
* Marker::                      
* String::                      
* Compiled Function::           

Garbage Collection - Step by Step

* Invocation::                  
* garbage_collect_1::           
* mark_object::                 
* gc_sweep::                    
* sweep_lcrecords_1::           
* compact_string_chars::        
* sweep_strings::               
* sweep_bit_vectors_1::         

Evaluation; Stack Frames; Bindings

* Evaluation::                  
* Dynamic Binding; The specbinding Stack; Unwind-Protects::  
* Simple Special Forms::        
* Catch and Throw::             
* Error Trapping::              

Symbols and Variables

* Introduction to Symbols::     
* Obarrays::                    
* Symbol Values::               

Buffers

* Introduction to Buffers::     A buffer holds a block of text such as a file.
* Buffer Lists::                Keeping track of all buffers.
* Markers and Extents::         Tagging locations within a buffer.
* The Buffer Object::           The Lisp object corresponding to a buffer.

Text

* The Text in a Buffer::        Representation of the text in a buffer.
* Ibytes and Ichars::           Representation of individual characters.
* Byte-Char Position Conversion::  
* Searching and Matching::      Higher-level algorithms.

Multilingual Support

* Introduction to Multilingual Issues #1::  
* Introduction to Multilingual Issues #2::  
* Introduction to Multilingual Issues #3::  
* Introduction to Multilingual Issues #4::  
* Character Sets::              
* Encodings::                   
* Internal Mule Encodings::     
* Byte/Character Types; Buffer Positions; Other Typedefs::  
* Internal Text APIs::         
* Coding for Mule::             
* CCL::                         
* Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues::  
* Modules for Internationalization::  

Encodings

* Japanese EUC (Extended Unix Code)::  
* JIS7::                        

Internal Mule Encodings

* Internal String Encoding::    
* Internal Character Encoding::  

Byte/Character Types; Buffer Positions; Other Typedefs

* Byte Types::                  
* Different Ways of Seeing Internal Text::  
* Buffer Positions::            
* Other Typedefs::              
* Usage of the Various Representations::  
* Working With the Various Representations::  

Internal Text APIs

* Basic internal-format APIs::  
* The DFC API::                 
* The Eistring API::            

Coding for Mule

* Character-Related Data Types::  
* Working With Character and Byte Positions::  
* Conversion to and from External Data::  
* General Guidelines for Writing Mule-Aware Code::  
* An Example of Mule-Aware Code::  
* Mule-izing Code::             

Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues

* Microsoft Documentation::     
* Locales::                     
* More about code pages::       
* More about locales::          
* Unicode support under Windows::  
* The golden rules of writing Unicode-safe code::  
* The format of the locale in setlocale()::  
* Random other Windows I18N docs::  

Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows

* Introduction to Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows::  
* Point::                       
* Window Hierarchy::            
* The Window Object::           
* Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects::  

The Redisplay Mechanism

* Critical Redisplay Sections::  
* Line Start Cache::            
* Redisplay Piece by Piece::    
* Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism::  
* Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects::  

Extents

* Introduction to Extents::     Extents are ranges over text, with properties.
* Extent Ordering::             How extents are ordered internally.
* Format of the Extent Info::   The extent information in a buffer or string.
* Zero-Length Extents::         A weird special case.
* Mathematics of Extent Ordering::  A rigorous foundation.
* Extent Fragments::            Cached information useful for redisplay.

Events and the Event Loop

* Introduction to Events::      
* Main Loop::                   
* Specifics of the Event Gathering Mechanism::  
* Specifics About the Emacs Event::  
* Event Queues::                
* Event Stream Callback Routines::  
* Other Event Loop Functions::  
* Stream Pairs::                
* Converting Events::           
* Dispatching Events; The Command Builder::  
* Focus Handling::              
* Editor-Level Control Flow Modules::  

Asynchronous Events; Quit Checking

* Signal Handling::             
* Control-G (Quit) Checking::   
* Profiling::                   
* Asynchronous Timeouts::       
* Exiting::                     

Lstreams

* Creating an Lstream::         Creating an lstream object.
* Lstream Types::               Different sorts of things that are streamed.
* Lstream Functions::           Functions for working with lstreams.
* Lstream Methods::             Creating new lstream types.

Interface to MS Windows

* Different kinds of Windows environments::  
* Windows Build Flags::         
* Windows I18N Introduction::   
* Modules for Interfacing with MS Windows::  

Interface to the X Window System

* Lucid Widget Library::        An interface to various widget sets.
* Modules for Interfacing with X Windows::  

Lucid Widget Library

* Generic Widget Interface::    The lwlib generic widget interface.
* Scrollbars::                  
* Menubars::                    
* Checkboxes and Radio Buttons::  
* Progress Bars::               
* Tab Controls::                

Dumping

* Dumping Justification::       
* Overview::                    
* Data descriptions::           
* Dumping phase::               
* Reloading phase::             
* Remaining issues::            

Dumping phase

* Object inventory::            
* Address allocation::          
* The header::                  
* Data dumping::                
* Pointers dumping::            

Future Work

* Future Work -- General Suggestions::  
* Future Work -- Elisp Compatibility Package::  
* Future Work -- Drag-n-Drop::  
* Future Work -- Standard Interface for Enabling Extensions::  
* Future Work -- Better Initialization File Scheme::  
* Future Work -- Keyword Parameters::  
* Future Work -- Property Interface Changes::  
* Future Work -- Toolbars::     
* Future Work -- Menu API Changes::  
* Future Work -- Removal of Misc-User Event Type::  
* Future Work -- Mouse Pointer::  
* Future Work -- Extents::      
* Future Work -- Version Number and Development Tree Organization::  
* Future Work -- Improvements to the @code{xemacs.org} Website::  
* Future Work -- Keybindings::  
* Future Work -- Byte Code Snippets::  
* Future Work -- Lisp Stream API::  
* Future Work -- Multiple Values::  
* Future Work -- Macros::       
* Future Work -- Specifiers::   
* Future Work -- Display Tables::  
* Future Work -- Making Elisp Function Calls Faster::  
* Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement::  
* Future Work -- Better Rendering Support::

Future Work -- Toolbars

* Future Work -- Easier Toolbar Customization::  
* Future Work -- Toolbar Interface Changes::  

Future Work -- Mouse Pointer

* Future Work -- Abstracted Mouse Pointer Interface::  
* Future Work -- Busy Pointer::  

Future Work -- Extents

* Future Work -- Everything should obey duplicable extents::  

Future Work -- Keybindings

* Future Work -- Keybinding Schemes::  
* Future Work -- Better Support for Windows Style Key Bindings::  
* Future Work -- Misc Key Binding Ideas::  

Future Work -- Byte Code Snippets

* Future Work -- Autodetection::  
* Future Work -- Conversion Error Detection::  
* Future Work -- Unicode::      
* Future Work -- BIDI Support::  
* Future Work -- Localized Text/Messages::  

Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement

* Future Work -- Lisp Engine Discussion::  
* Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement -- Implementation::  
* Future Work -- Startup File Modification by Packages::  

Future Work Discussion

* Discussion -- Garbage Collection::  
* Discussion -- Glyphs::        
* Discussion -- Dialog Boxes::  
* Discussion -- Multilingual Issues::  
* Discussion -- Instantiators and Generic Property Accessors::  
* Discussion -- Switching to C++::  
* Discussion -- Windows External Widget::  
* Discussion -- Packages::      
* Discussion -- Distribution Layout::  

Discussion -- Garbage Collection

* Discussion -- Pure Space::    
* Discussion -- Hashtable-Based Marking and Cleanup::  
* Discussion -- The Anti-Cons::  

Old Future Work

* Old Future Work -- A Portable Unexec Replacement::  
* Old Future Work -- Indirect Buffers::  
* Old Future Work -- Improvements in support for non-ASCII (European) keysyms under X::  
* Old Future Work -- RTF Clipboard Support::  
* Old Future Work -- xemacs.org Mailing Address Changes::  
* Old Future Work -- Lisp callbacks from critical areas of the C code::  

@end detailmenu
@end menu

@node Introduction, Authorship of XEmacs, Top, Top
@chapter Introduction
@cindex introduction
@cindex authorship, manual

This manual documents the internals of XEmacs.  It presumes knowledge of
how to use XEmacs (@pxref{Top,,, xemacs, XEmacs User's Manual}), and
especially, knowledge of XEmacs Lisp (@pxref{Top,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp
Reference Manual}).  Information in either of these manuals will not be
repeated here, and some information in the Lisp Reference Manual in
particular is more relevant to a person working on the internals than
the average XEmacs Lisp programmer. (In such cases, a cross-reference is
usually made to the Lisp Reference Manual.)

Ideally, this manual would be complete and up-to-date.  Unfortunately,
in reality it is neither, due to the limited resources of the
maintainers of XEmacs. (That said, it is much better than the internal
documentation of most programs.) Also, much information about the
internals is documented only in the code itself, in the form of
comments.  Furthermore, since the maintainers are more likely to be
working on the code than on this manual, information contained in
comments may be more up-to-date than information in this manual.  Do not
assume that all information in this manual is necessarily accurate as of
the snapshot of the code you are looking at, and in the case of
contradictions between the code comments and the manual, @strong{always}
assume that the code comments are correct. (Because of the proximity of
the comments to the code, comments will rarely be out-of-date.)

The manual is organized in chapters which are broadly grouped into major
divisions:

@enumerate
@item
First is the introduction, including this chapter and chapters on the
history and authorship of XEmacs.
@item
Next, starting with @ref{XEmacs from the Outside}, are a couple of chapters
giving a broad overview of the internal workings of XEmacs.
@item
Afterwards, starting with @ref{XEmacs from the Perspective of
Building}, are some chapters documenting important information relevant to
those working on the code.
@item
The remaining divisions document the nitty-gritty details of the
internal workings.  First, starting with @ref{XEmacs from the Inside},
is a division on the low-level types and allocation routines and the
workings of the Lisp interpreter that drives XEmacs.
@item
Next, starting with @ref{Buffers}, is a division on the parts of the
code specifically devoted to text processing, including multilingual
support (Mule).
@item
Afterwards, starting with @ref{Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows}, is a
division covering the display mechanism and the objects and modules
relevant to this.
@item
Then, starting with @ref{Events and the Event Loop}, is a division
covering the interface between XEmacs and the outside world, including
user interactions, subprocesses, file I/O, interfaces to particular
windowing systems, and dumping.
@item
Finally, starting with @ref{Future Work}, is a division containing
proposals and discussion relating to future work on XEmacs.
@end enumerate

This manual was primarily written by Ben Wing.  Certain sections were
written by others, including those mentioned on the title page as well
as other coders.  Some sections were lifted directly from comments in
the code, and in those cases we may not completely be aware of the
authorship.  In addition, due to the collaborative nature of XEmacs,
many people have made small changes and emendations as they have
discovered problems.

The following is a (necessarily incomplete) list of the work that was
@emph{not} done by Ben Wing (for more complete information, take a look
at the ChangeLog for the @file{man} directory and the CVS records of
actual changes):

@table @asis
@item Stephen Turnbull
Various cleanup work, mostly post-2000.  Object-Oriented Techniques in
XEmacs.  A Reader's Guide to XEmacs Coding Conventions.  Searching and
Matching.  Regression Testing XEmacs.  Modules for Regression Testing.
Lucid Widget Library.  A number of sections in the Future Work chapter.
@item Martin Buchholz
Various cleanup work, mostly pre-2001.  Docs on inline functions.  Docs
on dfc conversion functions (Conversion to and from External Data).
Improvements in support for non-ASCII (European) keysyms under X.
A section or two in the Future Work chapter.
@item Hrvoje Niksic
Coding for Mule.
@item Matthias Neubauer
Garbage Collection - Step by Step.
@item Olivier Galibert
Portable dumper documentation.
@item Andy Piper
Redisplay Piece by Piece.  Glyphs.
@item Chuck Thompson
Line Start Cache.
@item Kenichi Handa
CCL.
@item Jamie Zawinski
A couple of sections in the Future Work chapter.
@end table

@node Authorship of XEmacs, A History of Emacs, Introduction, Top
@chapter Authorship of XEmacs
@cindex authorship, XEmacs

XEmacs is the result of the time and effort of many people, and the
active developers have changed over time.  There are two major
components of the XEmacs effort -- writing the code itself and providing
all the support work (testing the code, releasing beta and final
versions, handling patches, reading bug reports, maintaining the web
site, managing the mailing lists, etc. etc.).  Neither component would
work without the other.

@subheading CODING

The primary code contributor over the years has been Ben Wing (active
since late 1992).  Between 1991 and 1995, large amounts of coding was
contributed by Jamie Zawinski and Chuck Thompson.  Many other people
have authored major subsystems or otherwise contributed large amounts of
code, including Andy Piper, Hrvoje Niksic, Jerry James, Jonathan Harris,
Kyle Jones, Martin Buchholz, Michael Sperber, Olivier Galibert, Richard
Mlynarik, Stig, William Perry and plenty of others.

Primary XEmacs-specific subsystems and their authors:

@table @asis
@item Objects
@itemize @minus
@item
Conversion from 26-bit to 28-bit pointers and integers, lrecords, lcrecords: Richard Mlynarik, 1994
@item
Conversion to 32-bit pointers and 31-bit integers: Kyle Jones, Martin Buchholz
@item
Portable dumper, object descriptions: Olivier Galibert
@item
KKCC (new garbage collector), ephemerons, weak boxes: Michael Sperber and students
@item
Random object work (object equal and hash methods, weak lists, lcrecord lists, bit vectors, dynarr, blocktype, opaque, string resizing): Ben Wing
@item
Profiling: Ben Wing
@item
Some byte-compilation and hash-table improvements: Martin Buchholz
@item
Bignum: Jerry James
@end itemize

@item Internationalization/Mule
@itemize @minus
@item
mostly Ben Wing; many ideas for future work, Stephen Turnbull
@end itemize

@item I/O
@itemize @minus
@item
Basic event/event-stream implementation: Jamie Zawinski
@item
Most event work since 1994: Ben Wing
@item
Asynchronous stuff (async timeouts, signals, quit-checking): Ben Wing
@item
Process method abstraction, Windows process work: Kirill Katsnelson
@item
Misc-user events, async timeouts, most quit-checking and signal code, most other work since 1994: Ben Wing
@item
Lstreams: Ben Wing
@end itemize

@item Display
@itemize @minus
@item
Redisplay mechanism: implementation, Chuck Thompson; additional work, lots of people
@item
Glyphs: mostly Ben Wing
@item
Specifiers: Ben Wing
@item
Extents: initial implementation, someone at Lucid; rewrite, 1994, Ben Wing
@item
Widgets: Andy Piper
@item
JPEG/PNG/TIFF image converters: Ben Wing, William Perry, Jareth Hein, others (see comment in @file{glyphs-eimage.c})
@item
Menus: Jamie Zawinski, someone at Lucid (Lucid menus)
@item
Scrollbars: Chuck Thompson, ??? (Lucid scrollbar)
@item
Multi-device/device-independence work (console/device/etc methods): Ben Wing, prototype by chuck thompson
@item
Faces: first implementation, Jamie Zawinski; second, chuck; third, Ben Wing
@item
Fonts/colors: first implementation, Jamie Zawinski; further work, Ben Wing
@item
Toolbars: implementation, chuck, much interface work, Ben Wing
@item
Gutters, tabs: andy piper
@end itemize

@item Device subsystems
@itemize @minus
@item
X Windows: Jamie Zawinksi, Ben Wing, others
@item
GTK: William Perry, Malcolm Purvis
@item
MS Windows: initial implementation, Jonathan Harris; some more work, Andy Piper, Ben Wing
@item
TTY: Chuck Thompson, Ben Wing
@item
Cygwin: Andy Piper
@end itemize

@item Misc
@itemize @minus
@item
Configure: initial porting from fsf, Chuck Thompson; conversion to autoconf 2, much rewriting, Martin Buchholz
@item
Most initialization-related code: Ben Wing
@item
Internals manual, much of Lisp manual: Ben Wing
@item
FSF synching: initial sync with FSF 19, Richard Mlynarik, further work, Ben Wing
@end itemize
@end table

@subheading SUPPORT

Currently, support duties are handled by many different people.

Release managers have been

@itemize @minus
@item
Stephen Turnbull (April 2001 - January 2003, March 2004 - present, 21.2.47 - 21.4.12, 21.5.2 - 21.5.7, 21.5.17 - present)
@item
Vin Shelton (May 2003 - present, 21.4.13 - present)
@item
Steve Youngs (July 2002 - September 2003, 21.5.8 - 21.5.16)
@item
Martin Buchholz (December 1998, November 1999 - May 2001, 21.2.7 - 21.2.8, 21.2.21 - 21.2.46, 21.5.0 - 21.5.1)
@item
Steve Baur (early 1997 - December 1998, February 1999 - November 1999, 19.15 - 21.2.5, 21.2.9 - 21.2.20)
@item
Andy Piper (December 1998, 21.2.6)
@item
Chuck Thompson (June 1994 - September 1996, 19.11 - 19.14)
@item
Jamie Zawinski (April 1991 - June 1994, 19.0 - 19.10)
@end itemize

The recent overlapping dates are intentional, since two or three trees
are maintained simultaneously at any point.

Other major support work:

@itemize @minus
@item
Adrian Aichner wrote and maintains the web site.
@item
Stephen Turnbull has produced many of the beta and semi-stable releases
and has attempted to be the "face" of XEmacs on the newsgroups and
mailing lists.
@item
Steve Youngs, Ville Skytta, and now Norbert Koch have taken turns
maintaining the packages.
@item
Vin Shelton maintains the stable releases.
@item
Testing - #### Norbert, Adrian, ???
@end itemize

@ignore
@c fix this!

@table @asis

@item Jamie Zawinski, Eric Benson, Matthieu Devin, Harlan Sexton
These were the early creators of Lucid Emacs, the predecessor of Xemacs.
Jamie Zawinski was the primary maintainer and coder for Lucid Emacs,
active between early 1991 and June 1994.  He presided over versions 19.0
through 19.10, and then abruptly left for Netscape.  He wrote the
event stream code, the Xt interface code, the byte compiler, the
original version of the X selection code, the first, second and third
versions of the face code which appeared in 19.0, 19.6 and 19.9
respectively.  Part of the keymap code separated the Lisp directories
into many subdirectories and many smaller changes.  Matthieu Devin wrote
the original version of the extents code.  Someone else at Lucid wrote
the Lucid widget library (LWLIB), with the exception of the scrollbar
code, which was added later.

@item Richard Mlynarik
Active 1991 to 1993, author of much of the current Lisp object scheme,
including Lrecords and LC records (added this support in 1993 to allow
for 28-bit pointers, which had previously been restricted to 26 bits.)
Moved the minibuffer and abbreve code into Lisp, worked on the keymap
code and did the initial synching between Xemacs and the first released
version of GNU Emacs version 19 in mid-1993.

@item Martin Buchholz
Active 1995 to 2001, maintainer of Xemacs late 1999 to ?, author of the
current configure support, mini optimizations to the byte interpreter,
many improvements to the case changing code and many bug fixes to the
process and system-specific code, also general spell checking and code
cleanliness guru.

@item Steve Baur
Maintainer of Xemacs 1996 to 1999, responsible for many improvements to
the Xemacs development process, for example, creation of the review
board and arranging for Xemacs to be placed under CVS.  Author of the
package code.

@item Chuck Thompson
Active January 1993 to June 1996, author of the current and previous
versions of the redisplay code and maintainer of Xemacs from mid-1994
to mid-1996.  Creator of XEMacs.org.  Also wrote the scrollbar code, the
original configure support, and prototype versions of the toolbar and
device code.

@item Ben Wing
Active April 1993 to April 1996 and February 2000 to present.  Chief
coder for Xemacs between 1994 and 1996.  Ben Wing was never the
maintainer of Xemacs, and as a result, is the author of more of the
Xemacs specific code in Xemacs than anyone else. Author of the mule
support (Extense code), the glis-phonetically spelled-and specifiers
code most of the toolbars, and device distraction code, the error
checking code, the Lstream code, the bit vector, char-table, and
range-table code, much of the current Xt code, much, much of the events
code (including most of the TTY event code), some of the phase code, and
numerous other aspects of the code.  Also author of most of the Xemacs
documentation including the internals manual and the Xemacs editions to
the Lisp reference manual, and responsible for much of the synching
between Xemacs and GNU Emacs.

@item Kyle Jones
Author of the minimal tag bits support, which allows for 32-bit
pointers and 31-bit integers.

@item Olivier Galibert
Author of the portable dumping mechanism.

@item Andy Piper
Author of the widget support, the gutter support and much of the
Microsoft Windows support.

@item Kirill Katsnelson
Author of many improvements to Microsoft Windows support, the current
sub-process code, and revamping of the display size change mechanism.

@item Jonathan Harris
Author of much of the Microsoft Windows support.
@end table

@c fix this!
Authorship of some of the modules:

@table @file
@item alloc.c
Inherited 1991 from a prototype of GNU Emacs 19.  Around mid-1993
Richard Mlynarik redid much of the code, creating the existing system of
object abstractions, (where each object can define its own marking
method, printing method, and so on) and the existing scheme of Lrecords
and LC records.  This was done both to increase the number of bits that
a pointer can occupy from 26 to 28, and provide a general framework for
creating new object types easily.  The garbage collection and
froblock-phonetically spelled-allocation code is left over from the
original version, but was cleaned up somewhat by Mlynarik.  Later in
1993, Jamie Zawinski improved the code that kept track of pure space
usage so it would report exactly where you exceeded the pure space and
how much pure space you are going to have to add to get everything to
fit.  He also added code to issue nice pure space and garbage
collections statistics at the end of dumping.  Early in 1995, Ben Wing
cleaned up the froblock code to be as compact as possible, added the
various bits of error checking, which are controlled using the
_ErrorCheck*.  He also added the ability of strings to be resized, which
is necessary under MULE, because you can replace one character in a
string with another character of a different size.  As a result, the
string resizes.  Ben Wing also added bit factors for 1913 around
September 1995, and Elsie record lists for 1914 around December 1995.
Steve Baur did some work on the purification and dump time code, and
added Doug Lea Malloc support from Emacs 20.2 circa 1998.  Kyle Jones
continued to work done by Mlynarik, reducing the number of primitive
Lisp types so that there are only three: integer character and pointer
type, which encompasses all other types.  This allows for 31-bit
integers and 32-bit pointers, although there is potential slowdown in
some extra in directions when determining the type of an object, and
some memory increase for the objects that previously were considered to
be the most primitive types.  Martin Buchholz has recently (February
2000) done some work to eliminate most of the slowdown.

Olivier Galibert, mid-1999 to 2000, implemented the portable
dumper.  This writes out the state of the Lisp object heap to
disk file in a real locatable fashion so that it can later be
read in at any memory location.  This work entails a number of
changes in Alec.C.  For example, pure space was removed and
structures were created to define the types of all the elements
contained in the various lisp object structures and associated
structures.

@item alloca.c
Inherited a long time ago from a prerelease version of GNU Emacs 19,
kept in sync with more recent versions very few changes from Xemacs.
Most changes consist of converting the code to ANSI C, and fixing up the
includes at the top of the file to follow Xemacs conventions.

@item alloca.s
Inherited almost unchanged from FSF kept in sync up through 19.30
basically no changes for Xemacs.
@end table
@end ignore

@node A History of Emacs, The XEmacs Split, Authorship of XEmacs, Top
@chapter A History of Emacs
@cindex history of Emacs, a
@cindex Emacs, a history of
@cindex Hackers (Steven Levy)
@cindex Levy, Steven
@cindex ITS (Incompatible Timesharing System)
@cindex Stallman, Richard
@cindex RMS
@cindex MIT
@cindex TECO
@cindex FSF
@cindex Free Software Foundation

  XEmacs is a powerful, customizable text editor and development
environment.  It began in 1991 as Lucid Emacs, which was in turn
derived from GNU Emacs, a program written by Richard Stallman of the
Free Software Foundation.  GNU Emacs dates back to 1985 and was
modelled after Unipress Emacs, an editor written by James Gosling in
1981 and based on a series of other "Emacs"-like editors, including
EINE (EINE Is Not EMACS), c. 1976, by Dan Weinreb, which run on the
MIT Lisp Machine and was the first Emacs written in Lisp; ZWEI (ZWEI
Was EINE Initially), c. 1978, by Dan Weinreb and Mike McMahon; Multics
Emacs, c. 1978, by Bernie Greenberg, which was written in MacLisp and
also used Lisp as its extension language; and ZMACS, c. 1980, a direct
descendant of ZWEI that on ran the Symbolics LM-2, LMI LispM, and
later, TI Explorer (1983-1989).  These in turn were inspired by the
first Emacs, a package called EMACS, written in 1976 by Richard
Stallman, Guy Steele, and Dave Moon.  This was a merger of TECMAC and
TMACS, a pair of "TECO-macro realtime editors" written by Guy Steele,
Dave Moon, Richard Greenblatt, Charles Frankston, et al., and added a
dynamic loader and Meta-key cmds.  It ran under ITS (the Incompatible
Timesharing System) on a DEC PDP 10 and under TWENEX on a Tops-20 and
was written in TECO and PDP 10 assembly.  ITS was one of the first
time-sharing operating systems and dates back well before Unix.  ITS,
TECO, and Emacs were products of a group of people at MIT who called
themselves ``hackers'', who shared an idealistic belief system about
the free exchange of information and were fanatical in their devotion
to and time spent with computers. (The hacker subculture dates back to
the late 1950's at MIT and is described in detail in Steven Levy's
book @cite{Hackers}.  This book also includes a lot of information
about Stallman himself and the development of Lisp, a programming
language developed at MIT that underlies Emacs.)

@menu
* Through Version 18::          Unification prevails.
* Epoch::                       An early graphical split of GNU Emacs.
* Lucid Emacs::                 One version 19 Emacs.
* GNU Emacs 19::                The other version 19 Emacs.
* GNU Emacs 20::                The other version 20 Emacs.
* XEmacs::                      The continuation of Lucid Emacs.
@end menu

@node Through Version 18, Epoch, A History of Emacs, A History of Emacs
@section Through Version 18
@cindex version 18, through
@cindex Gosling, James
@cindex Great Usenet Renaming

As described above, Emacs began life in the mid-1970's as a series of
editor macros for TECO, an early editor on the PDP-10.  In the early
1980's it was rewritten in C as a collaboration between Richard
M. Stallman (RMS) and James Gosling (the creator of Java); its extension
language was known as @dfn{Mocklisp}.  This version of Emacs-in-C formed
the basis for the early versions of GNU Emacs and also for Gosling's
Unipress Emacs, a commercial product.  Because of bad blood between the
two over the issue of commercialism, RMS pretty much disowned this
collaboration, referring to it as "Gosling Emacs".

At this point we pick up with a time line of events. (A broader timeline
is available at @uref{http://http://www.jwz.org/doc/emacs-timeline.html,
``Emacs Timeline''}.)

@strong{NOTE}: Sometimes there are two release dates listed below.  In
this case, the first one is the date listed in the source code, and
the second one is when the official announcement was made on
Usenet. (Sometimes, one or the other of the dates is missing, and then
the date below reflects the only existing one.)

@itemize @bullet
@item
Unipress Emacs, a $395 commercial product, was released on May 6, 1983.
This was an outgrowth of the Emacs-in-C collaboration written by Gosling
and RMS.

@item
The first entry on @file{net.emacs} available on Google is dated
August 20, 1984:

@example
From: B.BURGER (btb@@hogpc.UUCP)
Subject: Arrow Key Problems 
Newsgroups: net.emacs
Date: 1984-08-20 11:15:46 PST 

I would greatly appreciate some help getting my arrow keys to work
with EMACS 4.5 on an AT&T 3B20.  My terminal is an AT&T PC6300
(IBM-compatible) using an AT&T 4410 terminal emulator.  While this
may not yet be a common configuration, I believe the same problem
has come up using an hp2621 emulator or a real live vt100.

The problem is that, when I press an arrow key, it isn't
transmitted/read by emacs (one or the other) correctly.
The 4410 terminal description that I'm using defines up=M-[A
(it appears as ^[[A, with the initial ^[ as one character).
Pressting cntrl-Q up_arrow while in emacs shows me the same thing.
On the vt100 the same thing happens but the terminal file says up=M-A
(it appears as ^[A).  I've tried every other imaginable up= but get
the same results.  I've also been unsuccessful writing a macro that
understands what my keyboard is saying.

Any ideas on how I can get the arrow keys to do somethingt? 
Anything?  Thanks in advance.

--Bruce Burger     AT&T-Information Systems     Freehold, NJ
  @{...ihnp4!@}hogpc!btb    (201) 577-5230
@end example

@item
GNU Emacs versions 1.0 through 1.12 were apparently released in early
1985.  The next version after this was 13.0; there were no GNU Emacs
versions 2 through 12.

@item
GNU Emacs version 13.0? 1.0? was released on March 20, 1985.  This
appears to be the initial public release.  This was also based on this
same Emacs-in-C collaboration.

Here is the release notice:

@example
From: Chuck Wegrzyn (wegrzyn@@encore.UUCP)
Subject: Public Domain EMACS available from GNU Project 
Newsgroups: net.emacs, net.general, net.unix, net.unix-wizards
Date: 1985-03-20 08:03:20 PST 

 The GNU project has released its first major subsystem,
 the EMACS editor. This editor is a sophisticated screen
 editor that is compatible and comparable with the EMACS
 editors being sold by UniPress and CCA. It comes with
 Mock Lisp ( did you know that UniPress trademarked MLISP??),
 and all the little bells and features most of us expect
 with EMACS.

 The GNU version of EMACS, written by Richard Stallman, is
 available for distribution. The distribution includes all
 source code for EMACS and a source code level debugger.
 Furthermore, under the GNU project banner, the EMACS system
 can be distributed (in source code form) by one and all.

 I was thinking of sending out the source code over the net,
 but resisted : it is over 1Mbyte of code. If there is
 enough demand, I will add a UUCP dial-in to our system, or
 send out tapes, or ... ?

 Is anyone interested in EMACS? If so, please tell me how
 you think I should distribute it?

   Chuck Wegrzyn
  @{allegra,decvax,ihnp4,princeton@}!encore!wegrzyn
@end example

@item
GNU Emacs version 15.10 was released on April 11, 1985.

@item
GNU Emacs version 15.34 was released on May 7, 1985.  This appears
to be the last release of version 15.

@item
GNU Emacs version 16 (first released version was 16.56) was released on
July 15, 1985.  All Gosling code was removed due to potential copyright
problems with the code.
@item
Version 16.57: released on September 16, 1985.
@item
Versions 16.58, 16.59: released on September 17, 1985.
@item
Version 16.60: released on September 19, 1985.  These later version 16's
incorporated patches from the net, esp. for getting Emacs to work under
System V.
@item
Version 17.36 (first official v17 release) released on December 20,
1985.  Included a TeX-able user manual.  First official unpatched
version that worked on vanilla System V machines.
@item
Version 17.43 (second official v17 release) released on January 25,
1986.
@item
Version 17.45 released on January 30, 1986.
@item
Version 17.46 released on February 4, 1986.
@item
Version 17.48 released on February 10, 1986 (February 9 on net.emacs).
@item
Version 17.49 released on February 12, 1986.
@item
Version 17.55 released on March 18, 1986.
@item
Version 17.57 released on March 27, 1986.
@item
Version 17.58 released on April 4, 1986.
@item
Version 17.61 released on April 12 (?), 1986 (April 22 on net.emacs).
@item
Version 17.63 released on May 7, 1986.
@item
Version 17.64 released on May 12, 1986.
@item
Version 18.24 (a beta version) released on October 2, 1986.
@item
Version 18.30 (a beta version) released on November 15, 1986.
@item
Version 18.31 (a beta version) released on November 23, 1986.
@item
Version 18.32 (a beta version) released on December 6 or 7, 1986.
@item
Version 18.33 (a beta version) released on December 12, 1986.
@item
Version 18.35 (a beta version) released on January 5, 1987.
@item
Version 18.36 (a beta version) released on January 21, 1987.
@item
January 27, 1987: The Great Usenet Renaming.  net.emacs is now
comp.emacs.
@item
Version 18.37 (a beta version) released on February 9 or 12, 1987.
@item
Version 18.38 (a beta version) released on March 2 or 3, 1987.
@item
Version 18.39 (a beta version) released on March 14, 1987.
@item
Version 18.40 (a beta version) released on March 18, 1987.
@item
Version 18.41 (the first ``official'' release) released on March 22,
1987.
@item
Version 18.45 released on June 2, 1987.
@item
Version 18.46 released on June 8 or 9, 1987.
@item
Version 18.47 released on June 10 or 18, 1987.
@item
Version 18.48 released on August 30 or September 3, 1987.
@item
Version 18.49 released on September 16 or 18, 1987.
@item
Version 18.50 released on February 11 or 13, 1988.
@item
Version 18.51 released on May 6 or 7, 1988.
@item
Version 18.52 released on September 1, 1988.
@item
Version 18.53 released on February 23 or 24, 1989.
@item
Version 18.54 released on April 26, 1989.
@item
Version 18.55 released on August 18 or 23, 1989.  This is the earliest version
that is still available by FTP. (Verified in November 2004.)
@item
Version 18.56 released on January 16 or 17, 1991.
@item
Version 18.57 released on January 25, 1991.
@item
Version 18.58 released on February 18, 1991.
@item
Version 18.59 released on October 30 or 31, 1992.
@end itemize


@node Epoch, Lucid Emacs, Through Version 18, A History of Emacs
@section Epoch
@cindex Epoch
@cindex UIUC

#### Document Epoch

  A time line for Epoch is

@itemize @bullet
@item
Epoch 1.0 released December 14, 1989. (by Simon Kaplan, Chris Love, et al.)
@item
Epoch 2.0 released December 23, 1989.
@item
Epoch 3.1 released February 6, 1990.
@item
Epoch 3.2 released December[????] 11, 1990.
@item
Epoch 4.0 released August 27, 1990.
@end itemize

@node Lucid Emacs, GNU Emacs 19, Epoch, A History of Emacs
@section Lucid Emacs
@cindex Lucid Emacs
@cindex Lucid Inc.
@cindex Energize
@cindex Epoch

  Lucid Emacs was developed by the (now-defunct) Lucid Inc., a maker of
C++ and Lisp development environments.  It began when Lucid decided they
wanted to use Emacs as the editor and cornerstone of their C++
development environment (called ``Energize'').  They needed many features
that were not available in the existing version of GNU Emacs (version
18.5something), in particular good and integrated support for GUI
elements such as mouse support, multiple fonts, multiple window-system
windows, etc.  A branch of GNU Emacs called Epoch, written at the
University of Illinois, existed that supplied many of these features;
however, Lucid needed more than what existed in Epoch.  At the time, the
Free Software Foundation was working on version 19 of Emacs (this was
sometime around 1991), which was planned to have similar features, and
so Lucid decided to work with the Free Software Foundation.  Their plan
was to add features that they needed, and coordinate with the FSF so
that the features would get included back into Emacs version 19.

  Delays in the release of version 19 occurred, however (resulting in it
finally being released more than a year after what was initially
planned), and Lucid encountered unexpected technical resistance in
getting their changes merged back into version 19, so they decided to
release their own version of Emacs, which became Lucid Emacs 19.0.

@cindex Zawinski, Jamie
@cindex Sexton, Harlan
@cindex Benson, Eric
@cindex Devin, Matthieu
  The initial authors of Lucid Emacs were Matthieu Devin, Harlan Sexton,
and Eric Benson, and the work was later taken over by Jamie Zawinski,
who became ``Mr. Lucid Emacs'' for many releases.

  A time line for Lucid Emacs is

@itemize @bullet
@item
Version 19.0 shipped with Energize 1.0, April 1992.
@item
Version 19.1 released June 4, 1992.
@item
Version 19.2 released June 19, 1992.
@item
Version 19.3 released September 9, 1992.
@item
Version 19.4 released January 21, 1993.
@item
Version 19.5 released February 5, 1993.  This was a repackaging of 19.4 with a
few bug fixes and shipped with Energize 2.0.  It was a trade-show giveaway
and never released to the net.
@item
Version 19.6 released April 9, 1993.
@item
Version 19.7 was a repackaging of 19.6 with a few bug fixes and
shipped with Energize 2.1.  Never released to the net.
@item
Version 19.8 released September 6, 1993. (Epoch 4.0 merger of
redisplay code, preliminary I18N support, code merged from GNU Emacs
19.8 beta)
@item
Version 19.9 released January 12, 1994. (Scrollbars, Athena.)
@item
Version 19.10 released May 27, 1994. (Uses `configure'; code merged
from GNU Emacs 19.23 beta and further merging with Epoch 4.0) Known as
"Lucid Emacs" when shipped by Lucid, and as "XEmacs" when shipped by
Sun; but Lucid went out of business a few days later and it's unclear
very many copies of 19.10 were released by Lucid. (Last release by
Jamie Zawinski.)
@end itemize

@node GNU Emacs 19, GNU Emacs 20, Lucid Emacs, A History of Emacs
@section GNU Emacs 19
@cindex GNU Emacs 19
@cindex Emacs 19, GNU
@cindex version 19, GNU Emacs
@cindex FSF Emacs

  About a year after the initial release of Lucid Emacs, the FSF
released a beta of their version of Emacs 19 (referred to here as ``GNU
Emacs'').  By this time, the current version of Lucid Emacs was
19.6. (Strangely, the first released beta from the FSF was GNU Emacs
19.7.) A time line for GNU Emacs version 19 is

@itemize @bullet
@item
Version 19.7 beta released May 22, 1993.  First public beta v19 release.
@item
Version 19.8 beta released May 25 or 27, 1993.
@item
Version 19.9 beta released May 27, 1993.
@item
Version 19.10 beta released May 30, 1993.
@item
Version 19.11 beta released June 1, 1993.
@item
Version 19.12 beta released June 1 or 2, 1993.
@item
Version 19.13 beta released June 8, 1993.
@item
Version 19.14 beta released June 17, 1993.
@item
Version 19.15 beta released June 19, 1993.
@item
Version 19.16 beta released July 6, 1993.
@item
Version 19.17 beta released July 17, 1993.
@item
Version 19.18 beta released August 8 or 9, 1993.
@item
Version 19.19 beta released August 14 or 15, 1993.
@item
Version 19.20 beta released November 11 or 17, 1993.
@item
Version 19.21 beta released November 16 or 17, 1993.
@item
Version 19.22 beta released November 27 or 28, 1993.
@item
Version 19.23 beta released May 17, 1994.
@item
Version 19.24 beta released May 23 or 16 (?), 1994.
@item
Version 19.25 beta released May 30 or June 3, 1994.
@item
Version 19.26 beta released September 7 or 11, 1994.
@item
Version 19.27 beta released September 11 or 14, 1994.
@item
Version 19.28 (first ``official'' release) released November 1, 1994.
@item
Version 19.29 released June 19 or 21, 1995.
@item
Version 19.30 released November 24, 1995.
@item
Version 19.31 released May 25, 1996.
@item
Version 19.32 released July 31, 1996.
@item
Version 19.33 released August 11, 1996.
@item
Version 19.34 released August 21, 1996.
@item
Version 19.34b released September 6, 1996.
@end itemize

@cindex Mlynarik, Richard
@cindex Baur, Steve
  In some ways, GNU Emacs 19 was better than Lucid Emacs; in some ways,
worse.  Lucid soon began incorporating features from GNU Emacs 19 into
Lucid Emacs; for the first year, the work was mostly done by Richard
Mlynarik, who had been working on and using GNU Emacs for a long time
(back as far as version 16 or 17).  After that, Lucid folded and Sun
continued with XEmacs; further merging work has continued up through
the present, done mostly by Ben Wing but a good deal of synching was
done by Steve Baur in 1996 with GNU Emacs 19.34.

@node GNU Emacs 20, XEmacs, GNU Emacs 19, A History of Emacs
@section GNU Emacs 20
@cindex GNU Emacs 20
@cindex Emacs 20, GNU
@cindex version 20, GNU Emacs
@cindex FSF Emacs

On February 2, 1997 work began on GNU Emacs to integrate Mule.  The first
release was made in September of that year.

A timeline for GNU Emacs 20 is

@itemize @bullet
@item
Version 20.1 released September 15 or 17, 1997.
@item
Version 20.2 released September 19 or 20, 1997.
@item
Version 20.3 released August 19, 1998.
@item
version 20.4 released July 12, 1999; on comp.emacs, July 27.
@item
version 20.5 released December 4, 1999.
@item
version 20.6 released February 26, 2000.
@item
version 20.7 released June 13, 2000.
@end itemize

A timeline for GNU Emacs 21 is

@itemize @bullet
@item
version 21.1 released October 20, 2001.
@item
Version 21.2 released March 16, 2002.
@item
Version 21.3 released March 19, 2003.
@end itemize

@node XEmacs,  , GNU Emacs 20, A History of Emacs
@section XEmacs
@cindex XEmacs

@cindex Sun Microsystems
@cindex University of Illinois
@cindex Illinois, University of
@cindex SPARCWorks
@cindex Andreessen, Marc
@cindex Baur, Steve
@cindex Buchholz, Martin
@cindex Kaplan, Simon
@cindex Wing, Ben
@cindex Thompson, Chuck
@cindex Win-Emacs
@cindex Epoch
@cindex Amdahl Corporation
  Around the time that Lucid was developing Energize, Sun Microsystems
was developing their own development environment (called ``SPARCWorks'')
and also decided to use Emacs.  They joined forces with the Epoch team
at the University of Illinois and later with Lucid.  The maintainer of
the last-released version of Epoch was Marc Andreessen, but he dropped
out and the Epoch project, headed by Simon Kaplan, lured Chuck Thompson
away from a system administration job to become the primary Lucid Emacs
author for Epoch and Sun.  Chuck's area of specialty became the
redisplay engine (he replaced the old Lucid Emacs redisplay engine with
a ported version from Epoch and then later rewrote it from scratch).
Sun also hired Ben Wing (the author of Win-Emacs, a port of Lucid Emacs
to Microsoft Windows 3.1) in 1993, for what was initially a one-month
contract to fix some event problems but later became a many-year
involvement, punctuated by a six-month contract with Amdahl Corporation.

@cindex rename to XEmacs
@cindex Thompson, Chuck
@cindex Wing, Ben
  In 1994, Sun and Lucid agreed to rename Lucid Emacs to XEmacs (a name
not favorable to either company); the first release called XEmacs was
version 19.11.  In June 1994, Lucid folded and Jamie quit to work for
the newly formed Mosaic Communications Corp., later Netscape
Communications Corp. (co-founded by the same Marc Andreessen, who had
quit his Epoch job to work on a graphical browser for the World Wide
Web).  Chuck and Ben then become the primary authors and maintainers
of XEmacs, with Chuck putting out versions 19.11 through 19.14 in
conjunction with Ben.  For 19.12 through 19.14, Chuck added the new
redisplay and various other display improvements and Ben added MULE
support (support for Asian and other languages), multi-device support,
glyphs, specifiers, and GIF/JPG/PNG support, and redesigned most of
the internal Lisp subsystems to better support the MULE work, display
work and the various other features being added to XEmacs.  After
19.14 Chuck retired from XEmacs and Steve Baur stepped in as release
engineer.  Ben Wing continued on as the primary author and architect
of XEmacs and has remained, sometimes on-and-off, with XEmacs until
the present day (late 2004), being responsible for perhaps 75% of all
the non-FSF code in the core (i.e. not the packages) of XEmacs.

@cindex MULE merged XEmacs appears
  Soon after 19.13 was released, work began in earnest on the MULE
internationalization code and the source tree was divided into two
development paths.  The MULE version was initially called 19.20, but was
soon renamed to 20.0.  In 1996 Martin Buchholz of Sun Microsystems took
over the care and feeding of it and worked on it in parallel with the
19.14 development that was occurring at the same time.  After much work
by Martin, it was decided to release 20.0 ahead of 19.15 in February
1997.  The source tree remained divided until 20.2 when the version 19
source was finally retired at version 19.16.

@cindex Baur, Steve
@cindex Buchholz, Martin
@cindex XEmacs goes it alone
  In 1997, Sun finally dropped all pretense of support for XEmacs and
Martin Buchholz left the company in November.  Since then, and mostly
for the previous year, because Steve Baur was never paid to work on
XEmacs, XEmacs has existed solely on the contributions of volunteers
from the Free Software Community.

@cindex Jones, Kyle
@cindex Niksic, Hrvoje
@cindex Galibert, Olivier
@cindex Piper, Andy
@cindex Harris, Jonathan
@cindex Katsnelson, Kirill
@cindex Turnbull, Stephen
@cindex Shelton, Vin
@cindex Wing, Ben
  Between 1997 and 2000, MS-Windows support was added and stabilized by
Jonathan Harris, Andy Piper, Ben Wing and Kirill Katsnelson.  Hrvoje
Niksic and Kyle Jones figured prominently in XEmacs development during
these same years.  Steve Baur added the package system in 1997 (?),
and Olivier Galibert also added the portable dumper support around
2000.  Martin Buchholz took over from Steve Baur as release manager in
late 1998 (?), and continued in this position through to eary 2000
(?), when Stephen Turnbull took it over.  XEmacs has also been split
into stable and experimental branches since early 1999, and Vin
Shelton has been the release manager of the stable branches since the
beginning.  Ben Wing suffered severe pain problems throughout much of
this time, making him unable to use his hands, but he contributed when
he could, especially in the form of dictated design documents.

@cindex Sperber, Michael
@cindex Turnbull, Stephen
@cindex James, Jerry
@cindex Youngs, Steve
@cindex Aichner, Adrian
@cindex Wing, Ben
@cindex Crestani, Marcus
@cindex Perry, Bill
@cindex Purvis, Malcolm
@cindex Shelton, Vin
  Starting around 2000, Kyle, Hrvoje, Martin and Kirill became less active.
Jonathan Harris had dropped out of the project around 1998, and Andy
Piper became mostly inactive by the year 2001 or 2002.  New faces
appeared, however, and others continued strong:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Michael Sperber, who had been in the background as a beta tester for a
fair amount of time, began to assume a more active role.  He revamped
the path-searching code at initialization time, did some major work on
the CVS repositories, and is in the process of a major project to
replace the garbage collector, which he is overseeing with some of his
students (e.g. Marcus Crestani).
@item
Steve Youngs stepped in as package maintainer in late 1998 (?).
@item
Stephen Turnbull has contained to produce the experimental beta
releases, write code when he can, produce many design documents, and
generally oversee the managerial aspects of the project.
@item
Jerry James appeared on the scene in early 2002 and has contributed a
large amount of code, including the module subsystem, bignums, and
lots of other code cleanup.
@item
Bill Perry, who had been active on and off in XEmacs since the early
1990's (e.g. he did a fair amount of work on the JPG and PNG interface
and added the TIFF interface, in addition to writing the Emacs/W3
browser), added GTK support for XEmacs, a major project for which he
received a multi-month contract through BeOpen (?).  He has since
disappeared but Malcolm Purvis has taken up the GTK project again and
is keeping it going when he has time.
@item
Adrian Aichner is continuing to create and update the web site on
@uref{www.xemacs.org,XEmacs Web Site}, and is a particularly active
beta tester.
@item
Ben Wing has recovered somewhat from the bad years of 1997 - 1999 and
has resumed his position as Architect of XEmacs and chief code
contributor to the project.  He added Mule on Windows support, Unicode
support, the Internals manual (originally written by him during his
last days at Sun) and many other projects, and is now working on a new
behaviors system and cleanups of various other subsystems.
@item
Vin Shelton continues to put out stable releases of XEmacs.
@end itemize

@cindex merging attempts
  Many attempts have been made to merge XEmacs and GNU Emacs, but they
have consistently failed.

  A more detailed history is contained in the XEmacs About page.

  For more detailed information about the features added to each version,
see the files @file{NEWS}, @file{ONEWS}, and @file{OONEWS} in the
@file{etc/} directory.

  A time line for XEmacs is

@itemize @bullet
@item
version 19.11 (first XEmacs) released September 13, 1994.
@item
Initial work on Mule support begins September 1994 by both Ben Wing and
Stig.  Both projects got bogged down in other issues.
@item
version 19.12 released June 23, 1995. (The Release Times 10.  Included
rewritten redisplay, TTY support, multi-device support, device and
console objects, specifiers, glyphs, toolbars, horizontal scrollbars,
Lucid scrollbar widget, 3-d modeline, stay-up Lucid menus, resizable
minibuffer, echo area is a true buffer, MD5 hashing support, expanded
menubar, redone menu specification format (including menu filters),
rewritten extents, renamed "screen" to "frame", misc-user events,
rewritten face code, rewritten mouse code, warnings system, CL
backquote syntax, critical C-g, code merging with GNU Emacs 19.28.
New packages Hyperbole, OOBR, hm--html-menus, viper, lazy-lock,
ksh-mode, rsz-minibuf.)
@item
Mule work done in earnest from May through November, 1995 by Ben Wing.
Early on, much of the work involved Mule-izing and was incorporated
into 19.12 and 19.13.  After the release of 19.13, further work was
forked onto a new development branch, which eventually became 20.0.
@item
version 19.13 released September 1, 1995. (Bug-fix release.  Message
logging, background pixmaps, sticky modifiers, Linux audio support,
new Elisp manual, keyboard-translate-table.  New packages ada-mode,
arc-mode, auto-show-mode, completion, dabbrev, easymenu, live-icon,
mailcrypt 3.2, two-column.)
@item
xemacs.org created, date ??? -- early 1996?.
@item
version 19.14 released June 23, 1996. (TTY colors, mousable/color
modeline, GIF/JPEG/PNG support, file dialog box, blinking cursor,
gnuattach, auto scrolling horizontally to keep point in view, major
code merging with GNU Emacs 19.30, key bindings from GNU Emacs 19.30,
surrogate minibuffers, function-key-map, key-translation-map.  New
packages PSGML, Java/VRML modes, GNUS 5.2.)
@item
version 20.0 released February 9, 1997.
@item
version 19.15 released March 28, 1997. (Custom, widget, new logo and
background color, introduction of `compatible' variables, major code
merging with GNU Emacs 19.30.  New packages EFS, TM, AUC Tex, redo,
igrep, uniquify, many others.)
@item
version 20.1 (not released to the net) April 15, 1997.
@item
version 20.2 released May 16, 1997.
@item
version 19.16 released October 31, 1997. (Bug-fix release.  Faster
font-locking.  Not much else.)
@item
version 20.3 (the first stable version of XEmacs 20.x) released November 30,
1997.
@item
version 20.4 released February 28, 1998.
@item
version 21.0.60 released December 10, 1998. (The version naming scheme was
changed at this point: [a] the second version number is odd for stable
versions, even for beta versions; [b] a third version number is added,
replacing the "beta xxx" ending for beta versions and allowing for
periodic maintenance releases for stable versions.  Therefore, 21.0 was
never "officially" released; similarly for 21.2, etc.)
@item
version 21.0.61 released January 4, 1999.
@item
version 21.0.63 released February 3, 1999.
@item
version 21.0.64 released March 1, 1999.
@item
version 21.0.65 released March 5, 1999.
@item
version 21.0.66 released March 12, 1999.
@item
version 21.0.67 released March 25, 1999.
@item
version 21.1.2 released May 14, 1999. (This is the followup to 21.0.67.
The second version number was bumped to indicate the beginning of the
"stable" series.)
@item
version 21.1.3 released June 26, 1999.
@item
version 21.1.4 released July 8, 1999.
@item
version 21.1.6 released August 14, 1999. (There was no 21.1.5.)
@item
version 21.1.7 released September 26, 1999.
@item
version 21.1.8 released November 2, 1999.
@item
version 21.1.9 released February 13, 2000.
@item
version 21.1.10 released May 7, 2000.
@item
version 21.1.10a released June 24, 2000.
@item
version 21.1.11 released July 18, 2000.
@item
version 21.1.12 released August 5, 2000.
@item
version 21.1.13 released January 7, 2001.
@item
version 21.1.14 released January 27, 2001.
@item
version 21.2.9 released February 3, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.10 released February 5, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.11 released March 1, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.12 released March 5, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.13 released March 12, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.14 released May 14, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.15 released June 4, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.16 released June 11, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.17 released June 22, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.18 released July 14, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.19 released July 30, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.20 released November 10, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.21 released November 28, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.22 released November 29, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.23 released December 7, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.24 released December 14, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.25 released December 24, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.26 released December 31, 1999.
@item
version 21.2.27 released January 18, 2000.
@item
version 21.2.28 released February 7, 2000.
@item
version 21.2.29 released February 16, 2000.
@item
version 21.2.30 released February 21, 2000.
@item
version 21.2.31 released February 23, 2000.
@item
version 21.2.32 released March 20, 2000.
@item
version 21.2.33 released May 1, 2000.
@item
version 21.2.34 released May 28, 2000.
@item
version 21.2.35 released July 19, 2000.
@item
version 21.2.36 released October 4, 2000.
@item
version 21.2.37 released November 14, 2000.
@item
version 21.2.38 released December 5, 2000.
@item
version 21.2.39 released December 31, 2000.
@item
version 21.2.40 released January 8, 2001.
@item
version 21.2.41 "Polyhymnia" released January 17, 2001.
@item
version 21.2.42 "Poseidon" released January 20, 2001.
@item
version 21.2.43 "Terspichore" released January 26, 2001.
@item
version 21.2.44 "Thalia" released February 8, 2001.
@item
version 21.2.45 "Thelxepeia" released February 23, 2001.
@item
version 21.2.46 "Urania" released March 21, 2001.
@item
version 21.2.47 "Zephir" released April 14, 2001.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.0 "Solid Vapor" released April 16, 2001.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.1 "Copyleft" released April 19, 2001.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.2 "Developer-Friendly Unix APIs" released May 10, 2001.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.3 "Academic Rigor" released May 17, 2001.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.4 "Artificial Intelligence" released July 28, 2001.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.5 "Civil Service" released October 23, 2001.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.6 "Common Lisp" released December 17, 2001.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.7 "Economic Science" released May 4, 2002.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.8 "Honest Recruiter" released May 9, 2002.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.9 "Informed Management" released August 23, 2002.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.10 "Military Intelligence" released November 2, 2002.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.11 "Native Windows TTY Support" released January 3, 2003.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.12 "Portable Code" released January 15, 2003.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.13 "Rational FORTRAN" released May 25, 2003.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.14 "Reasonable Discussion" released September 3, 2003.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.15 "Security Through Obscurity" released February 2, 2004.
@item
XEmacs 21.4.16 "Successful IPO" released December 5, 2004.
@item
version 21.5.0 "alfalfa" released April 18, 2001.
@item
version 21.5.1 "anise" released May 9, 2001.
@item
version 21.5.2 "artichoke" released July 28, 2001.
@item
version 21.5.3 "asparagus" released September 7, 2001.
@item
version 21.5.4 "bamboo" released January 8, 2002.
@item
version 21.5.5 "beets" released March 5, 2002.
@item
version 21.5.6 "bok choi" released April 5, 2002.
@item
version 21.5.7 "broccoflower" released July 2, 2002.
@item
version 21.5.8 "broccoli" released July 27, 2002.
@item
version 21.5.9 "brussels sprouts" released August 30, 2002.
@item
version 21.5.10 "burdock" released January 4, 2003.
@item
version 21.5.11 "cabbage" released February 16, 2003.
@item
version 21.5.12 "carrot" released April 24, 2003.
@item
version 21.5.13 "cauliflower" released May 10, 2003.
@item
version 21.5.14 "cassava" released June 1, 2003.
@item
version 21.5.15 "celery" released September 3, 2003.
@item
version 21.5.16 "celeriac" released September 26, 2003.
@item
version 21.5.17 "chayote" released March 22, 2004.
@item
version 21.5.18 "chestnut" released October 22, 2004.
@end itemize

@node The XEmacs Split, XEmacs from the Outside, A History of Emacs, Top
@chapter The XEmacs Split
@cindex XEmacs split

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@subheading Ben Wing's attempts

@strong{Nota bene:} The following is a @strong{highly} opinionated
piece written by one of the main authors of XEmacs.  This reflects his
opinions, and his only!  It is included here because it may help to
clarify some of the issues that are keeping the two versions of Emacs
separate.

Many people look at the split between GNU Emacs and XEmacs and are
convinced that the XEmacs team is being needlessly divisive and just needs
to cooperate a bit with RMS, and the two versions of Emacs will merge. In
fact there have been six to seven major attempts at merging, each running
hundreds of messages long and all of them coming from the XEmacs side. All
have failed because they have eventually come to the same conclusion, which
is that RMS has no real interest in cooperation at all. If you work with
him, you have to do it his way -- "my way or the highway".  Specifically:

@enumerate
@item 

RMS insists on having legal papers signed for every bit of code that goes
into GNU Emacs. RMS's lawyers have told him that every contribution over
ten lines long requires legal papers. These papers cannot be filled out
over to the web but must be done so in person and mailed to the FSF.
Obviously this by itself has a tendency to inhibit contributions because of
the hassle factor. Furthermore, many people (and especially organizations)
are either hesitant to or refuse to sign legal papers, for reasons
mentioned below.  Because of these reasons, XEmacs has never enforced legal
signed papers for the code in it. Such papers are not a part of the GPL and
are not required by any projects other than those of the FSF (for example,
Linux does not require such papers). Since we do not know exactly who is
the author of every bit of code that has been contributed to XEmacs in the
last nine years, we would essentially have to rewrite large sections of the
code. The situation however, is worse than that because many of the large
copyright holders of XEmacs (for example Sun Microsystems) refuse to sign
legal papers. Although they have not stated their reasons, there are quite
a number of reasons not to sign legal papers:

@itemize @bullet
@item
By doing so you essentially give up all control over your code.  You can
no longer release your code under a different license.  If you want to
use your code that you've contributed to the FSF in a project of your
own, and that project is not released under the GPL, you are not allowed
to do this.  (This is supposed to be avoided by the standard assignment
contract used by the FSF, which either automatically relicenses the code
to the author for any purpose under any license, or promises to do so,
depending on the version -- stephen.)  Obviously, large companies tend
to want to reuse their code in many different projects and as a result
feel very uncomfortable about signing legal papers.
@item
One of the dangers of assigning copyright to the FSF is that if the FSF
happens to be taken over by some evil corporate identity or anyone with
different ideas than RMS, they will own all copyright-assigned code, and
can revoke the GPL and enforce any license they please.  (This is false,
according to RMS; the FSF's covenants and the assignment contracts
require that it or any successors may release the code only under
copyleft.  Thus, the only real loophole is if the FSF goes bankrupt,
somehow leaving the code in the public domain -- stephen.)  If the code
has many different copyright holders, this is much less likely of a
scenario.
@end itemize

@item
RMS does not like abstract data structures. Abstract data structures are
the foundation of XEmacs and most other modern programming projects. In
my opinion, is difficult to impossible to write maintainable and
expandable code without using abstract data structures. In merging talks
with RMS he has said we can have any abstract data structures we want in
a merged version but must allow direct access to the implementation as
well, which defeats the primary purpose of having abstract data
structures.

@item
RMS is very unwilling to compromise when it comes to divergent
implementations of the same functionality, which is very common between
XEmacs and GNU Emacs. Rather than taking the better interface on
technical grounds, RMS insists that both interfaces must be implemented
in C at the same level (rather than implementing one in C and the other
on top if it), so that code that uses either interface is just as
fast. This means that the resulting merged Emacs would be filled with a
lot of very complicated code to simultaneously support two divergent
interfaces, and would be difficult to maintain in this state.

@item
RMS's idea of compromise and cooperation is almost purely political
rather than technical. The XEmacs maintainers would like to have issues
resolved by examining them technically and deciding what makes the most
sense from a technical prospective. RMS however, wants to proceed on a
tit for tat kind of basis, which is to say, If we support this feature
of yours, we also get to support this other feature of mine. The
result of such a process is typically a big mess, because there is no
overarching design but instead a great deal of incompatible things
hodgepodged together.
@end enumerate

If only some of the above differences were firmly held by RMS, and if he
were willing to compromise effectively on the others and to demonstrate
willingness to work with us on the issues that he is less willing to
compromise on, we might go ahead with the merge despite misgivings. However
RMS has shown no real interest at all in compromising. He has never stated
how all of the redundant work that would be required to support his
preconditions would get done. It's unlikely that he would do it all and
it's certainly not clear that the XEmacs project would be willing to do it
all, given that it is a tremendous amount of extra work and the XEmacs
project is already strapped for coding resources. (Not to mention the
inherent difficulty in convincing people to redo existing work for
primarily political reasons.) In general the free software community is
quite strapped as a whole for coding resources; duplicative efforts amount
to very little positively and have a lot of negative effects in that they
take away what few resources we do have from projects that would actually
be useful.

RMS however, does not seem to be bothered by this. He is more interested in
sticking firm to his principles, though the heavens may fall down, than in
working forward to create genuinely useful software. It is abundantly clear
that RMS has no real interest in unity except if it happens to be on his
own terms and allows him ultimate control over the result. He would rather
see nothing happen at all than something that is not exactly according to
his principles.  The fact that few if any people share his principles is
meaningless to him.

@subheading Jamie Zawinski's attempts

In 1991, I was working at Lucid Inc., and our newest product,
Energize, was an integrated development environment for C and C++ on
Unix. The design of this development environment involved very tight
integration between the various tools: compilers, linkers, debuggers,
graphers, and editors. So of course we needed a powerful editor to tie
the whole thing together, and it was obvious to all of us that there
was only one editor that would do: Emacs.

At the time, the current version of GNU Emacs from the FSF was Emacs
18. There was another version of GNU Emacs called Epoch, that had been
developed at NCSA, which was a set of patches to Emacs 18 that gave it
much better GUI support (Emacs 18 was very much a tty program, with
GUI support crudely grafted on as an afterthought.)

For the last few years, Emacs 19 had been due to be released ``real
soon now,'' and was expected to integrate the various features of
Epoch in a cleaner way. The Epoch maintainers themselves saw Epoch as
an interim measure, awaiting the release of Emacs 19.

So, at Lucid we didn't want to tie ourselves to Emacs 18 or on Epoch,
because those code bases were considered obsolete by their
maintainers. We wanted to use Emacs 19 with our product: the idea was
that our product would operate with the off-the-shelf version of Emacs
19, which most people would already have pre-installed on their system
anyway. That way, Energize would make use, to some extent, of tools
you already had and were already using.

The only problem was, Emacs 19 wasn't done yet. So, we decided we
could help solve that problem, by providing money and resources to get
Emacs 19 finished.

Even though Energize was a proprietary, commercial product, all of our
work on Emacs (and on GCC and GDB) was released under the GPL. We even
assigned the copyright on all of our work back to the FSF, because we
had no proprietary interest in Emacs per se: it was just a tool that
we wanted to use, and we wanted it to work well, and that was best
achieved by making our modifications to it be as freely available as
possible. (This was one of the earliest, if not the earliest, example
of a commercial product being built to a significant extent out of
open source software.)

Well, our attempts to help the FSF complete their Emacs 19 project
were pretty much a disaster, and we reached the point where we just
couldn't wait any longer: we needed to ship our product to customers,
and our product needed to have an editor in it. So we bundled up our
work on GNU Emacs 19, called it Lucid Emacs, and released it to the
world.

This incident has become famous as one of the most significant
``forks'' in a free software code base.

When Lucid went out of business in 1994, and I came to Netscape, I
passed the torch for the maintenance of Lucid Emacs to Chuck Thompson
(at NCSA) and Ben Wing (at Sun), who renamed it from ``Lucid Emacs''
to ``XEmacs.''

To this day, XEmacs is as popular as FSFmacs, because it still
provides features and a design that many people find superior to the
FSF's version.

I attribute Lucid Emacs's success to two things, primarily:


First, that my focus was on user interface, and an attempt to both
make Emacs be a good citizen of modern GUI desktops, and to make it as
easy for new users to pick up Emacs as any other GUI editor;

Second, that I ran the Lucid Emacs project in a much more open,
inclusive way than RMS ran his project. I was not just willing, but
eager, to delegate significant and critical pieces of the project to
other hackers once they had shown that they knew what they were
doing. RMS was basically never willing to do this with anybody. Other
things that helped Lucid Emacs's success, but were probably less
important than the above:


We gave the users what they wanted first. People had been anticipating
Emacs 19 for years, and we stopped dragging our feet and finished
it. So this got us a lot of users up front. However, XEmacs's current
popularity can't be attributed to this, not since 1993, anyway.

Lucid Emacs was technically superior in many ways. This won us the
mindshare of many good developers, who preferred working with Lucid
Emacs to FSF Emacs. It would be nice if technical superiority was all
that mattered, but realistically, the other factors were probably more
important than this one, as far as number of users is concerned. The
following messages, from the Lucid Emacs mailing lists in 1992 and
1993, comprise the bulk (if not the entirety) of the public
discussions between the Lucid and FSF camps on why the split happened
and why a merger never did.
@uref{http://www.jwz.org/doc/lemacs.html,The Lucid Emacs Split}.

The current XEmacs maintainers have a much more pusillanimous summary
of this history on
@uref{http://www.xemacs.org/About/XEmacsVsGNUemacs.html,their XEmacs
versus GNU Emacs page}.

-- jwz, 11-Feb-2000. 

@node XEmacs from the Outside, The Lisp Language, The XEmacs Split, Top
@chapter XEmacs from the Outside
@cindex XEmacs from the outside
@cindex outside, XEmacs from the
@cindex read-eval-print

  XEmacs appears to the outside world as an editor, but it is really a
Lisp environment.  At its heart is a Lisp interpreter; it also
``happens'' to contain many specialized object types (e.g. buffers,
windows, frames, events) that are useful for implementing an editor.
Some of these objects (in particular windows and frames) have
displayable representations, and XEmacs provides a function
@code{redisplay()} that ensures that the display of all such objects
matches their internal state.  Most of the time, a standard Lisp
environment is in a @dfn{read-eval-print} loop---i.e. ``read some Lisp
code, execute it, and print the results''.  XEmacs has a similar loop:

@itemize @bullet
@item
read an event
@item
dispatch the event (i.e. ``do it'')
@item
redisplay
@end itemize

  Reading an event is done using the Lisp function @code{next-event},
which waits for something to happen (typically, the user presses a key
or moves the mouse) and returns an event object describing this.
Dispatching an event is done using the Lisp function
@code{dispatch-event}, which looks up the event in a keymap object (a
particular kind of object that associates an event with a Lisp function)
and calls that function.  The function ``does'' what the user has
requested by changing the state of particular frame objects, buffer
objects, etc.  Finally, @code{redisplay()} is called, which updates the
display to reflect those changes just made.  Thus is an ``editor'' born.

@cindex bridge, playing
@cindex taxes, doing
@cindex pi, calculating
  Note that you do not have to use XEmacs as an editor; you could just
as well make it do your taxes, compute pi, play bridge, etc.  You'd just
have to write functions to do those operations in Lisp.

@node The Lisp Language, XEmacs from the Perspective of Building, XEmacs from the Outside, Top
@chapter The Lisp Language
@cindex Lisp language, the
@cindex Lisp vs. C
@cindex C vs. Lisp
@cindex Lisp vs. Java
@cindex Java vs. Lisp
@cindex dynamic scoping
@cindex scoping, dynamic
@cindex dynamic types
@cindex types, dynamic
@cindex Java
@cindex Common Lisp
@cindex Gosling, James

  Lisp is a general-purpose language that is higher-level than C and in
many ways more powerful than C.  Powerful dialects of Lisp such as
Common Lisp are probably much better languages for writing very large
applications than is C. (Unfortunately, for many non-technical
reasons C and its successor C++ have become the dominant languages for
application development.  These languages are both inadequate for
extremely large applications, which is evidenced by the fact that newer,
larger programs are becoming ever harder to write and are requiring ever
more programmers despite great increases in C development environments;
and by the fact that, although hardware speeds and reliability have been
growing at an exponential rate, most software is still generally
considered to be slow and buggy.)

  The new Java language holds promise as a better general-purpose
development language than C.  Java has many features in common with
Lisp that are not shared by C (this is not a coincidence, since
Java was designed by James Gosling, a former Lisp hacker).  This
will be discussed more later.

For those used to C, here is a summary of the basic differences between
C and Lisp:

@enumerate
@item
Lisp has an extremely regular syntax.  Every function, expression,
and control statement is written in the form

@example
   (@var{func} @var{arg1} @var{arg2} ...)
@end example

This is as opposed to C, which writes functions as

@example
   func(@var{arg1}, @var{arg2}, ...)
@end example

but writes expressions involving operators as (e.g.)

@example
   @var{arg1} + @var{arg2}
@end example

and writes control statements as (e.g.)

@example
   while (@var{expr}) @{ @var{statement1}; @var{statement2}; ... @}
@end example

Lisp equivalents of the latter two would be

@example
   (+ @var{arg1} @var{arg2} ...)
@end example

and

@example
   (while @var{expr} @var{statement1} @var{statement2} ...)
@end example

@item
Lisp is a safe language.  Assuming there are no bugs in the Lisp
interpreter/compiler, it is impossible to write a program that ``core
dumps'' or otherwise causes the machine to execute an illegal
instruction.  This is very different from C, where perhaps the most
common outcome of a bug is exactly such a crash.  A corollary of this is that
the C operation of casting a pointer is impossible (and unnecessary) in
Lisp, and that it is impossible to access memory outside the bounds of
an array.

@item
Programs and data are written in the same form.  The
parenthesis-enclosing form described above for statements is the same
form used for the most common data type in Lisp, the list.  Thus, it is
possible to represent any Lisp program using Lisp data types, and for
one program to construct Lisp statements and then dynamically
@dfn{evaluate} them, or cause them to execute.

@item
All objects are @dfn{dynamically typed}.  This means that part of every
object is an indication of what type it is.  A Lisp program can
manipulate an object without knowing what type it is, and can query an
object to determine its type.  This means that, correspondingly,
variables and function parameters can hold objects of any type and are
not normally declared as being of any particular type.  This is opposed
to the @dfn{static typing} of C, where variables can hold exactly one
type of object and must be declared as such, and objects do not contain
an indication of their type because it's implicit in the variables they
are stored in.  It is possible in C to have a variable hold different
types of objects (e.g. through the use of @code{void *} pointers or
variable-argument functions), but the type information must then be
passed explicitly in some other fashion, leading to additional program
complexity.

@item
Allocated memory is automatically reclaimed when it is no longer in use.
This operation is called @dfn{garbage collection} and involves looking
through all variables to see what memory is being pointed to, and
reclaiming any memory that is not pointed to and is thus
``inaccessible'' and out of use.  This is as opposed to C, in which
allocated memory must be explicitly reclaimed using @code{free()}.  If
you simply drop all pointers to memory without freeing it, it becomes
``leaked'' memory that still takes up space.  Over a long period of
time, this can cause your program to grow and grow until it runs out of
memory.

@item
Lisp has built-in facilities for handling errors and exceptions.  In C,
when an error occurs, usually either the program exits entirely or the
routine in which the error occurs returns a value indicating this.  If
an error occurs in a deeply-nested routine, then every routine currently
called must unwind itself normally and return an error value back up to
the next routine.  This means that every routine must explicitly check
for an error in all the routines it calls; if it does not do so,
unexpected and often random behavior results.  This is an extremely
common source of bugs in C programs.  An alternative would be to do a
non-local exit using @code{longjmp()}, but that is often very dangerous
because the routines that were exited past had no opportunity to clean
up after themselves and may leave things in an inconsistent state,
causing a crash shortly afterwards.

Lisp provides mechanisms to make such non-local exits safe.  When an
error occurs, a routine simply signals that an error of a particular
class has occurred, and a non-local exit takes place.  Any routine can
trap errors occurring in routines it calls by registering an error
handler for some or all classes of errors. (If no handler is registered,
a default handler, generally installed by the top-level event loop, is
executed; this prints out the error and continues.) Routines can also
specify cleanup code (called an @dfn{unwind-protect}) that will be
called when control exits from a block of code, no matter how that exit
occurs---i.e. even if a function deeply nested below it causes a
non-local exit back to the top level.

Note that this facility has appeared in some recent vintages of C, in
particular Visual C++ and other PC compilers written for the Microsoft
Win32 API.

@item
In Emacs Lisp, local variables are @dfn{dynamically scoped}.  This means
that if you declare a local variable in a particular function, and then
call another function, that subfunction can ``see'' the local variable
you declared.  This is actually considered a bug in Emacs Lisp and in
all other early dialects of Lisp, and was corrected in Common Lisp. (In
Common Lisp, you can still declare dynamically scoped variables if you
want to---they are sometimes useful---but variables by default are
@dfn{lexically scoped} as in C.)
@end enumerate

For those familiar with Lisp, Emacs Lisp is modelled after MacLisp, an
early dialect of Lisp developed at MIT (no relation to the Macintosh
computer).  There is a Common Lisp compatibility package available for
Emacs that provides many of the features of Common Lisp.

The Java language is derived in many ways from C, and shares a similar
syntax, but has the following features in common with Lisp (and different
from C):

@enumerate
@item
Java is a safe language, like Lisp.
@item
Java provides garbage collection, like Lisp.
@item
Java has built-in facilities for handling errors and exceptions, like
Lisp.
@item
Java has a type system that combines the best advantages of both static
and dynamic typing.  Objects (except very simple types) are explicitly
marked with their type, as in dynamic typing; but there is a hierarchy
of types and functions are declared to accept only certain types, thus
providing the increased compile-time error-checking of static typing.
@end enumerate

The Java language also has some negative attributes:

@enumerate
@item
Java uses the edit/compile/run model of software development.  This
makes it hard to use interactively.  For example, to use Java like
@code{bc} it is necessary to write a special purpose, albeit tiny,
application.  In Emacs Lisp, a calculator comes built-in without any
effort - one can always just type an expression in the @code{*scratch*}
buffer.
@item
Java tries too hard to enforce, not merely enable, portability, making
ordinary access to standard OS facilities painful.  Java has an
@dfn{agenda}.  I think this is why @code{chdir} is not part of standard
Java, which is inexcusable.
@end enumerate

Unfortunately, there is no perfect language.  Static typing allows a
compiler to catch programmer errors and produce more efficient code, but
makes programming more tedious and less fun.  For the foreseeable future,
an Ideal Editing and Programming Environment (and that is what XEmacs
aspires to) will be programmable in multiple languages: high level ones
like Lisp for user customization and prototyping, and lower level ones
for infrastructure and industrial strength applications.  If I had my
way, XEmacs would be friendly towards the Python, Scheme, C++, ML,
etc... communities.  But there are serious technical difficulties to
achieving that goal.

The word @dfn{application} in the previous paragraph was used
intentionally.  XEmacs implements an API for programs written in Lisp
that makes it a full-fledged application platform, very much like an OS
inside the real OS.

@node XEmacs from the Perspective of Building, Build-Time Dependencies, The Lisp Language, Top
@chapter XEmacs from the Perspective of Building
@cindex XEmacs from the perspective of building
@cindex building, XEmacs from the perspective of

The heart of XEmacs is the Lisp environment, which is written in C.
This is contained in the @file{src/} subdirectory.  Underneath
@file{src/} are two subdirectories of header files: @file{s/} (header
files for particular operating systems) and @file{m/} (header files for
particular machine types).  In practice the distinction between the two
types of header files is blurred.  These header files define or undefine
certain preprocessor constants and macros to indicate particular
characteristics of the associated machine or operating system.  As part
of the configure process, one @file{s/} file and one @file{m/} file is
identified for the particular environment in which XEmacs is being
built.

XEmacs also contains a great deal of Lisp code.  This implements the
operations that make XEmacs useful as an editor as well as just a Lisp
environment, and also contains many add-on packages that allow XEmacs to
browse directories, act as a mail and Usenet news reader, compile Lisp
code, etc.  There is actually more Lisp code than C code associated with
XEmacs, but much of the Lisp code is peripheral to the actual operation
of the editor.  The Lisp code all lies in subdirectories underneath the
@file{lisp/} directory.

The @file{lwlib/} directory contains C code that implements a
generalized interface onto different X widget toolkits and also
implements some widgets of its own that behave like Motif widgets but
are faster, free, and in some cases more powerful.  The code in this
directory compiles into a library and is mostly independent from XEmacs.

The @file{etc/} directory contains various data files associated with
XEmacs.  Some of them are actually read by XEmacs at startup; others
merely contain useful information of various sorts.

The @file{lib-src/} directory contains C code for various auxiliary
programs that are used in connection with XEmacs.  Some of them are used
during the build process; others are used to perform certain functions
that cannot conveniently be placed in the XEmacs executable (e.g. the
@file{movemail} program for fetching mail out of @file{/var/spool/mail},
which must be setgid to @file{mail} on many systems; and the
@file{gnuclient} program, which allows an external script to communicate
with a running XEmacs process).

The @file{man/} directory contains the sources for the XEmacs
documentation.  It is mostly in a form called Texinfo, which can be
converted into either a printed document (by passing it through @TeX{})
or into on-line documentation called @dfn{info files}.

The @file{info/} directory contains the results of formatting the XEmacs
documentation as @dfn{info files}, for on-line use.  These files are
used when you enter the Info system using @kbd{C-h i} or through the
Help menu.

The @file{dynodump/} directory contains auxiliary code used to build
XEmacs on Solaris platforms.

The other directories contain various miscellaneous code and information
that is not normally used or needed.

The first step of building involves running the @file{configure} program
and passing it various parameters to specify any optional features you
want and compiler arguments and such, as described in the @file{INSTALL}
file.  (You may optionally run @file{autoconf} first to update the
@file{configure} script.  @xref{Modules for Build Configuration}.)
This determines what the build environment is, chooses the
appropriate @file{s/} and @file{m/} file, and runs a series of tests to
determine many details about your environment, such as which library
functions are available and exactly how they work.
Running these tests allows XEmacs to be compiled on a much
wider variety of platforms than those that the XEmacs developers happen
to be familiar with, including various sorts of hybrid platforms.  This
is especially important now that many operating systems give you a great
deal of control over exactly what features you want installed, and allow
for easy upgrading of parts of a system without upgrading the rest.  It
would be impossible to pre-determine and pre-specify the information for
all possible configurations.

Thus, the @file{s/} and @file{m/} files are basically @emph{evil},
since they contain platform-specific hard-coded
information.  XEmacs is moving in the direction of having all
system-specific information be determined dynamically by
@file{configure}.  Perhaps someday we can @code{rm -rf src/s src/m}.

@file{configure} also parses the version information from
@file{version.sh} and adds it to @file{config.h} as C preprocessor
macros.  These macros in turn are used to initialize some Lisp
variables, such as @samp{emacs-version}.  @xref{The version.sh Script}.

When configure is done running, it generates @file{Makefile}s and
@file{GNUmakefile}s and the file @file{src/config.h} (which describes
the features of your system) from template files.  You then run
@file{make}, which compiles the auxiliary code and programs in
@file{lib-src/} and @file{lwlib/} and the main XEmacs executable in
@file{src/}.  The result of compiling and linking is an executable
called @file{temacs}, which is @emph{not} the final XEmacs executable.
@file{temacs} by itself is not intended to function as an editor or even
display any windows on the screen, and if you simply run it, it will
exit immediately.  The @file{Makefile} runs @file{temacs} with certain
options that cause it to initialize itself, read in a number of basic
Lisp files, and then dump itself out into a new executable called
@file{xemacs}.  This new executable has been pre-initialized and
contains pre-digested Lisp code that is necessary for the editor to
function (this includes most basic editing functions,
e.g. @code{kill-line}, that can be defined in terms of other Lisp
primitives; some initialization code that is called when certain
objects, such as frames, are created; and all of the standard
keybindings and code for the actions they result in).  This executable,
@file{xemacs}, is the executable that you run to use the XEmacs editor.

Although @file{temacs} is not intended to be run as an editor, it can,
by using the incantation @code{temacs -batch -l loadup.el run-temacs}.
This is useful when the dumping procedure described above is broken, or
when using certain program debugging tools such as Purify.  These tools
get mighty confused by the tricks played by the XEmacs build process,
such as allocating memory in one process, and freeing it in the next.

@node Build-Time Dependencies, The Modules of XEmacs, XEmacs from the Perspective of Building, Top
@chapter Build-Time Dependencies
@cindex build-time dependencies
@cindex dependencies, build-time

This is a collection of random notes on build-time dependencies as of
about XEmacs 21.5.11.  Of course we use @file{make} to manage most
dependencies, especially for the C code.  The main thing here is for the
Release Engineer to run the @file{src/make-src-depend} script every so
often, at least at every release.

However, since most of XEmacs is written in Lisp, and we compile and
preload the Lisp for efficiency, managing Lisp compilation using
@file{make} would imply running XEmacs hundreds of times.  This would
make the build process unbearably long.  Thus those processes that
require running the same Lisp programs on many files are managed using
Lisp driver functions rather than @file{make}.  The situation is further
complicated by the fact that documentation strings are kept in an
external database, and referenced in the dumped XEmacs by file offset.
Finally, the Lisp files are processed to collect autoloaded function
information and customize dependencies, which are then written into
generated Lisp files.

About this, Ben sez:

@quotation
@enumerate 1
@item
Redumping depends on up-to-date dumped @file{.elc} files and @file{DOC}
but not directly on auto-autoloads.

@item
Rebuilding dumped @file{.elc} files depends on auto-autoloads being
up-to-date.

@item
Building the @file{DOC} file depends on up-to-date dumped @file{.elc}
files but not directly on auto-autoloads.

@item
Recompiling anything depends on @file{bytecomp.elc} and
@file{byte-optimize.elc} being up-to-date.
@end enumerate

Put these together and you'll see it's perfectly acceptable to build
auto-autoloads @strong{after} dumping if no @file{.elc} files are out-of-date.
@end quotation

These Lisp driver programs typically run from temacs, not a dumped
XEmacs.  The simplest (but time-consuming) way to achieve a sane
environment for running Lisp is to load @file{loadup.el} or
@file{loadup-el.el}.  (The latter is used to avoid loading possibly
out-of-date compiled Lisp files.)  If this is not done, you have to
construct the environment yourself.  See @file{dumped-lisp.el} to see
how it is done in the dumped XEmacs.

One potential gotcha is that very early customizations are now handled
by adding the definitions to the special variable
@code{custom-declare-variable-list}, defined in @file{subr.el}.  If you
use any higher-level functionality that might load @file{custom.el}, but
you do not need @file{subr.el}, you should @samp{defvar}
@code{custom-declare-variable-list} to prevent the @samp{void-variable}
error.  (Currently this is only needed for @file{make-docfile.el}.)

@node The Modules of XEmacs, The Build Configuration System, Build-Time Dependencies, Top
@chapter The Modules of XEmacs
@cindex modules of XEmacs

@menu
* A Summary of the Various XEmacs Modules::  
* Modules for Building XEmacs::       
* Low-Level Modules::           
* Basic Lisp Modules::          
* Modules for Standard Editing Operations::  
* Modules for Interfacing with the File System::  
* Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System::  
* Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System::  
@end menu

@node A Summary of the Various XEmacs Modules, Modules for Building XEmacs, The Modules of XEmacs, The Modules of XEmacs
@section A Summary of the Various XEmacs Modules
@cindex summary of the various XEmacs modules
@cindex modules, summary of the various XEmacs

The following is a list of the sections describing the various modules
(i.e. files) that implement XEmacs.  Some of them are in this chapter;
some of them are attached to the chapters describing the modules in
question.

@itemize @bullet
@item
@ref{Modules for Build Configuration}.
@item
@ref{Modules for Compiling XEmacs}.
@item
@ref{Modules for Preloading Lisp}.
@item
@ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item
@ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item
@ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item
@ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item
@ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item
@ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item
@ref{Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism}.
@item
@ref{Modules for Interfacing with the File System}.
@item
@ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item
@ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item
@ref{Modules for Interfacing with MS Windows}.
@item
@ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item
@ref{Modules for Internationalization}.
@item
@ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@end itemize

The following table contains cross-references from each module in XEmacs
21.5 to the section (if any) describing it.

@multitable @columnfractions .25 .75
@item @file{intl-auto-encap-win32.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{Emacs.ad.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{EmacsFrame.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{EmacsFrame.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{EmacsFrameP.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{EmacsManager.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{EmacsManager.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{EmacsManagerP.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{EmacsShell-sub.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{EmacsShell.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{EmacsShell.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{EmacsShellP.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{ExternalClient-Xlib.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{ExternalClient.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{ExternalClient.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{ExternalClientP.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{ExternalShell.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{ExternalShell.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{ExternalShellP.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{Makefile.in.in} @tab
@item @file{abbrev.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{alloc.c} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{alloca.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{alloca.s} @tab
@item @file{backtrace.h} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{balloon-x.c} @tab
@item @file{balloon_help.c} @tab
@item @file{balloon_help.h} @tab
@item @file{base64-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{bitmaps.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{blocktype.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{blocktype.h} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{broken-sun.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{buffer.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{buffer.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{bufslots.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{byte-compiler-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{bytecode.c} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{bytecode.h} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{c-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{callint.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{case-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{casefiddle.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{casetab.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{casetab.h} @tab
@item @file{ccl-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{charset.h} @tab
@item @file{chartab.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{chartab.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{cm.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism}.
@item @file{cm.h} @tab @ref{Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism}.
@item @file{cmdloop.c} @tab @ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item @file{cmds.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{coding-system-slots.h} @tab
@item @file{commands.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{compiler.h} @tab
@item @file{config.h.in} @tab
@item @file{config.h} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{conslots.h} @tab
@item @file{console-gtk-impl.h} @tab
@item @file{console-gtk.c} @tab
@item @file{console-gtk.h} @tab
@item @file{console-impl.h} @tab
@item @file{console-msw-impl.h} @tab
@item @file{console-msw.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{console-msw.h} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{console-stream-impl.h} @tab
@item @file{console-stream.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{console-stream.h} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{console-tty-impl.h} @tab
@item @file{console-tty.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{console-tty.h} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{console-x-impl.h} @tab
@item @file{console-x.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{console-x.h} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{console.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{console.h} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{data.c} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{database-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{database.c} @tab
@item @file{database.h} @tab
@item @file{debug.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{debug.h} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{depend} @tab
@item @file{device-gtk.c} @tab
@item @file{device-impl.h} @tab
@item @file{device-msw.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{device-tty.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{device-x.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{device.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{device.h} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{devslots.h} @tab
@item @file{dgif_lib.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{dialog-gtk.c} @tab
@item @file{dialog-msw.c} @tab
@item @file{dialog-x.c} @tab
@item @file{dialog.c} @tab
@item @file{dired-msw.c} @tab
@item @file{dired.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the File System}.
@item @file{doc.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{doprnt.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{dragdrop.c} @tab
@item @file{dragdrop.h} @tab
@item @file{dump-data.c} @tab
@item @file{dump-data.h} @tab
@item @file{dump-id.c} @tab
@item @file{dumper.c} @tab
@item @file{dumper.h} @tab
@item @file{dynarr.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{ecrt0.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{editfns.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{elhash.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{elhash.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{emacs-marshals.c} @tab
@item @file{emacs-new.c.old} @tab
@item @file{emacs-widget-accessors.c} @tab
@item @file{emacs.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{emodules.c} @tab
@item @file{emodules.h} @tab
@item @file{esd.c} @tab
@item @file{eval.c} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{event-Xt.c} @tab @ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item @file{event-gtk.c} @tab
@item @file{event-gtk.h} @tab
@item @file{event-msw.c} @tab @ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item @file{event-stream.c} @tab @ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item @file{event-tty.c} @tab @ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item @file{event-unixoid.c} @tab
@item @file{event-xlike-inc.c} @tab
@item @file{events-mod.h} @tab @ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item @file{events.c} @tab @ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item @file{events.h} @tab @ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item @file{extent-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{extents-impl.h} @tab
@item @file{extents.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{extents.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{extw-Xlib.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{extw-Xlib.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{extw-Xt.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{extw-Xt.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{faces.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{faces.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{file-coding.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Internationalization}.
@item @file{file-coding.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Internationalization}.
@item @file{fileio.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the File System}.
@item @file{filelock.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the File System}.
@item @file{filemode.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the File System}.
@item @file{floatfns.c} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{fns.c} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{font-lock.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{frame-gtk.c} @tab
@item @file{frame-impl.h} @tab
@item @file{frame-msw.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{frame-tty.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{frame-x.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{frame.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{frame.diff} @tab
@item @file{frame.h} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{frameslots.h} @tab
@item @file{free-hook.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{gccache-gtk.c} @tab
@item @file{gccache-gtk.h} @tab
@item @file{general-slots.h} @tab
@item @file{general.c} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{getloadavg.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{getpagesize.h} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{gif_err.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{gif_io.c} @tab
@item @file{gif_lib.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{gifalloc.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{gifrlib.h} @tab
@item @file{glade.c} @tab
@item @file{glyphs-eimage.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{glyphs-gtk.c} @tab
@item @file{glyphs-gtk.h} @tab
@item @file{glyphs-msw.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{glyphs-msw.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{glyphs-shared.c} @tab
@item @file{glyphs-widget.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{glyphs-x.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{glyphs-x.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{glyphs.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{glyphs.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{gmalloc.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{gpmevent.c} @tab @ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item @file{gpmevent.h} @tab @ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item @file{gtk-glue.c} @tab
@item @file{gtk-xemacs.c} @tab
@item @file{gtk-xemacs.h} @tab
@item @file{gui-gtk.c} @tab
@item @file{gui-msw.c} @tab
@item @file{gui-x.c} @tab
@item @file{gui.c} @tab
@item @file{gui.h} @tab
@item @file{gutter.c} @tab
@item @file{gutter.h} @tab
@item @file{hash-table-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{hash.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{hash.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{hftctl.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{hpplay.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{imgproc.c} @tab
@item @file{imgproc.h} @tab
@item @file{indent.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism}.
@item @file{inline.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{input-method-motif.c} @tab
@item @file{input-method-xlib.c} @tab
@item @file{insdel.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{insdel.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{intl-auto-encap-win32.c} @tab
@item @file{intl-auto-encap-win32.h} @tab
@item @file{intl-encap-win32.c} @tab
@item @file{intl-win32.c} @tab
@item @file{intl-x.c} @tab
@item @file{intl.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Internationalization}.
@item @file{iso-wide.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Internationalization}.
@item @file{keymap.c} @tab @ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item @file{keymap.h} @tab @ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item @file{lastfile.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{libinterface.c} @tab
@item @file{libinterface.h} @tab
@item @file{libsst.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{libsst.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{libst.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{line-number.c} @tab
@item @file{line-number.h} @tab
@item @file{linuxplay.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{lisp-disunion.h} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{lisp-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{lisp-union.h} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{lisp.h} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{lread.c} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{lrecord.h} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{lstream.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the File System}.
@item @file{lstream.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the File System}.
@item @file{macros.c} @tab @ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item @file{macros.h} @tab @ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item @file{make-src-depend} @tab
@item @file{malloc.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{marker.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{md5-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{md5.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{mem-limits.h} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{menubar-gtk.c} @tab
@item @file{menubar-msw.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{menubar-msw.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{menubar-x.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{menubar.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{menubar.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{minibuf.c} @tab @ref{Editor-Level Control Flow Modules}.
@item @file{miscplay.c} @tab
@item @file{miscplay.h} @tab
@item @file{mule-canna.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Internationalization}.
@item @file{mule-ccl.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Internationalization}.
@item @file{mule-ccl.h} @tab
@item @file{mule-charset.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Internationalization}.
@item @file{mule-charset.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Internationalization}.
@item @file{mule-coding.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Internationalization}.
@item @file{mule-mcpath.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Internationalization}.
@item @file{mule-mcpath.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Internationalization}.
@item @file{mule-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{mule-wnnfns.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Internationalization}.
@item @file{mule.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Internationalization}.
@item @file{nas.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{native-gtk-toolbar.c} @tab
@item @file{ndir.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the File System}.
@item @file{nsselect.m} @tab
@item @file{nt.c} @tab
@item @file{ntheap.c} @tab
@item @file{ntplay.c} @tab
@item @file{number-gmp.c} @tab
@item @file{number-gmp.h} @tab
@item @file{number-mp.c} @tab
@item @file{number-mp.h} @tab
@item @file{number.c} @tab
@item @file{number.h} @tab
@item @file{objects-gtk-impl.h} @tab
@item @file{objects-gtk.c} @tab
@item @file{objects-gtk.h} @tab
@item @file{objects-impl.h} @tab
@item @file{objects-msw-impl.h} @tab
@item @file{objects-msw.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{objects-msw.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{objects-tty-impl.h} @tab
@item @file{objects-tty.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{objects-tty.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{objects-x-impl.h} @tab
@item @file{objects-x.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{objects-x.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{objects.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{objects.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{offix-cursors.h} @tab
@item @file{offix-types.h} @tab
@item @file{offix.c} @tab
@item @file{offix.h} @tab
@item @file{opaque.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{opaque.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{paths.h.in} @tab
@item @file{paths.h} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{ppc.ldscript} @tab
@item @file{pre-crt0.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{print.c} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{process-nt.c} @tab
@item @file{process-slots.h} @tab
@item @file{process-unix.c} @tab
@item @file{process.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{process.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{process.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{procimpl.h} @tab
@item @file{profile.c.orig} @tab
@item @file{profile.c.rej} @tab
@item @file{profile.c} @tab
@item @file{profile.h} @tab
@item @file{ralloc.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{rangetab.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{rangetab.h} @tab
@item @file{realpath.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the File System}.
@item @file{redisplay-gtk.c} @tab
@item @file{redisplay-msw.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism}.
@item @file{redisplay-output.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism}.
@item @file{redisplay-tty.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism}.
@item @file{redisplay-x.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism}.
@item @file{redisplay.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism}.
@item @file{redisplay.h} @tab @ref{Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism}.
@item @file{regex.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{regex.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{regexp-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{scrollbar-gtk.c} @tab
@item @file{scrollbar-gtk.h} @tab
@item @file{scrollbar-msw.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{scrollbar-msw.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{scrollbar-x.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{scrollbar-x.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{scrollbar.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{scrollbar.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{search.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{select-common.h} @tab
@item @file{select-gtk.c} @tab
@item @file{select-msw.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{select-x.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{select.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{select.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{sgiplay.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{sheap.c} @tab
@item @file{signal.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{sound.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{sound.h} @tab
@item @file{specifier.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{specifier.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{src-headers} @tab
@item @file{strcat.c} @tab
@item @file{strcmp.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{strcpy.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{strftime.c} @tab
@item @file{sunOS-fix.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{sunplay.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{sunpro.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{symbol-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{symbols.c} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{symeval.h} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{symsinit.h} @tab @ref{Basic Lisp Modules}.
@item @file{syntax-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{syntax.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{syntax.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System}.
@item @file{sysdep.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{sysdep.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{sysdir.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{sysdll.c} @tab
@item @file{sysdll.h} @tab
@item @file{sysfile.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{sysfloat.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{sysproc.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{syspwd.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{syssignal.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{systime.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{systty.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{syswait.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{syswindows.h} @tab
@item @file{tag-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{termcap.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism}.
@item @file{terminfo.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism}.
@item @file{test-harness.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{tests.c} @tab
@item @file{text.c} @tab
@item @file{text.h} @tab
@item @file{toolbar-common.c} @tab
@item @file{toolbar-common.h} @tab
@item @file{toolbar-gtk.c} @tab
@item @file{toolbar-msw.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{toolbar-x.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{toolbar.c} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{toolbar.h} @tab @ref{Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{tooltalk.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{tooltalk.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System}.
@item @file{tparam.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism}.
@item @file{ui-byhand.c} @tab
@item @file{ui-gtk.c} @tab
@item @file{ui-gtk.h} @tab
@item @file{undo.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Standard Editing Operations}.
@item @file{unexaix.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexalpha.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexapollo.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexconvex.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexcw.c} @tab
@item @file{unexec.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexelf.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexelfsgi.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexencap.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexenix.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexfreebsd.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexfx2800.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexhp9k3.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexhp9k800.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexmips.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexnext.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexnt.c} @tab
@item @file{unexsni.c} @tab
@item @file{unexsol2-6.c} @tab
@item @file{unexsol2.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unexsunos4.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{unicode.c} @tab
@item @file{universe.h} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{vm-limit.c} @tab @ref{Low-Level Modules}.
@item @file{weak-tests.el} @tab @ref{Modules for Regression Testing}.
@item @file{widget.c} @tab
@item @file{win32.c} @tab
@item @file{window-impl.h} @tab
@item @file{window.c} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{window.h} @tab @ref{Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects}.
@item @file{winslots.h} @tab
@item @file{xemacs.def.in.in} @tab
@item @file{xgccache.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{xgccache.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{xintrinsic.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{xintrinsicp.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{xmmanagerp.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{xmotif.h} @tab
@item @file{xmprimitivep.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{xmu.c} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@item @file{xmu.h} @tab @ref{Modules for Interfacing with X Windows}.
@end multitable



@node Modules for Building XEmacs, Low-Level Modules, A Summary of the Various XEmacs Modules, The Modules of XEmacs
@section Modules for Building XEmacs
@cindex modules for building XEmacs
@cindex building XEmacs, modules for

@menu
* Modules for Build Configuration:: 
* Modules for Compiling XEmacs:: 
* Modules for Preloading Lisp:: 
@end menu



@node Modules for Build Configuration, Modules for Compiling XEmacs, Modules for Building XEmacs, Modules for Building XEmacs
@subsection Modules for Build Configuration
@cindex modules for build configuration
@cindex build configuration, modules for

@example
@file{configure}
@file{config.h.in}
@file{Makefile.in.in}
@file{version.sh}
@end example

@example
@file{configure.ac}
@file{configure.in}
@end example

@xref{The version.sh Script}.
@xref{The configure Script}.



@node Modules for Compiling XEmacs, Modules for Preloading Lisp, Modules for Build Configuration, Modules for Building XEmacs
@subsection Modules for Compiling XEmacs
@cindex modules for compiling xemacs
@cindex compiling xemacs, modules for

@strong{Please write this node!} @c ####

This node should contain descriptions of files like the various
Makefiles, and I guess cross-references to ellcc etc.



@node Modules for Preloading Lisp, , Modules for Compiling XEmacs, Modules for Building XEmacs
@subsection Modules for Preloading Lisp
@cindex modules for preloading lisp
@cindex preloading lisp, modules for

@strong{Please write this node!} @c ####

This node should contain descriptions of files like dumped-lisp.el
(maybe that goes in Modules for Build Configuration supra?),
update-elcs.el, and so on.



@node Low-Level Modules, Basic Lisp Modules, Modules for Building XEmacs, The Modules of XEmacs
@section Low-Level Modules
@cindex low-level modules
@cindex modules, low-level

@example
@file{version.sh}
@end example

This is a Bourne shell script which sets version-related variables.  It
is updated in the release process by the maintainer of each series or
branch, and may also be automatically updated.
@xref{The version.sh Script}.

@example
@file{config.h}
@end example

This is automatically generated from @file{config.h.in} based on the
results of configure tests and user-selected optional features and
contains preprocessor definitions specifying the nature of the
environment in which XEmacs is being compiled.



@example
@file{paths.h}
@end example

This is automatically generated from @file{paths.h.in} based on supplied
configure values, and allows for non-standard installed configurations
of the XEmacs directories.  It's currently broken, though.



@example
@file{emacs.c}
@file{signal.c}
@end example

@file{emacs.c} contains @code{main()} and other code that performs the most
basic environment initializations and handles shutting down the XEmacs
process (this includes @code{kill-emacs}, the normal way that XEmacs is
exited; @code{dump-emacs}, which is used during the build process to
write out the XEmacs executable; @code{run-emacs-from-temacs}, which can
be used to start XEmacs directly when temacs has finished loading all
the Lisp code; and emergency code to handle crashes [XEmacs tries to
auto-save all files before it crashes]).

Low-level code that directly interacts with the Unix signal mechanism,
however, is in @file{signal.c}.  Note that this code does not handle system
dependencies in interfacing to signals; that is handled using the
@file{syssignal.h} header file, described in section J below.



@example
@file{unexaix.c}
@file{unexalpha.c}
@file{unexapollo.c}
@file{unexconvex.c}
@file{unexec.c}
@file{unexelf.c}
@file{unexelfsgi.c}
@file{unexencap.c}
@file{unexenix.c}
@file{unexfreebsd.c}
@file{unexfx2800.c}
@file{unexhp9k3.c}
@file{unexhp9k800.c}
@file{unexmips.c}
@file{unexnext.c}
@file{unexsol2.c}
@file{unexsunos4.c}
@end example

These modules contain code dumping out the XEmacs executable on various
different systems. (This process is highly machine-specific and
requires intimate knowledge of the executable format and the memory map
of the process.) Only one of these modules is actually used; this is
chosen by @file{configure}.



@example
@file{ecrt0.c}
@file{lastfile.c}
@file{pre-crt0.c}
@end example

These modules are used in conjunction with the dump mechanism.  On some
systems, an alternative version of the C startup code (the actual code
that receives control from the operating system when the process is
started, and which calls @code{main()}) is required so that the dumping
process works properly; @file{crt0.c} provides this.

@file{pre-crt0.c} and @file{lastfile.c} should be the very first and
very last file linked, respectively. (Actually, this is not really true.
@file{lastfile.c} should be after all Emacs modules whose initialized
data should be made constant, and before all other Emacs files and all
libraries.  In particular, the allocation modules @file{gmalloc.c},
@file{alloca.c}, etc. are normally placed past @file{lastfile.c}, and
all of the files that implement Xt widget classes @emph{must} be placed
after @file{lastfile.c} because they contain various structures that
must be statically initialized and into which Xt writes at various
times.) @file{pre-crt0.c} and @file{lastfile.c} contain exported symbols
that are used to determine the start and end of XEmacs' initialized
data space when dumping.


@example
@file{inline.c}
@end example

This module is used in connection with inline functions (available in
some compilers).  Often, inline functions need to have a corresponding
non-inline function that does the same thing.  This module is where they
reside.  It contains no actual code, but defines some special flags that
cause inline functions defined in header files to be rendered as actual
functions.  It then includes all header files that contain any inline
function definitions, so that each one gets a real function equivalent.



@example
@file{debug.c}
@file{debug.h}
@end example

These functions provide a system for doing internal consistency checks
during code development.  This system is not currently used; instead the
simpler @code{assert()} macro is used along with the various checks
provided by the @samp{--error-check-*} configuration options.



@example
@file{universe.h}
@end example

This is not currently used.



@node Basic Lisp Modules, Modules for Standard Editing Operations, Low-Level Modules, The Modules of XEmacs
@section Basic Lisp Modules
@cindex Lisp modules, basic
@cindex modules, basic Lisp

@example
@file{lisp-disunion.h}
@file{lisp-union.h}
@file{lisp.h}
@file{lrecord.h}
@file{symsinit.h}
@end example

These are the basic header files for all XEmacs modules.  Each module
includes @file{lisp.h}, which brings the other header files in.
@file{lisp.h} contains the definitions of the structures and extractor
and constructor macros for the basic Lisp objects and various other
basic definitions for the Lisp environment, as well as some
general-purpose definitions (e.g. @code{min()} and @code{max()}).
@file{lisp.h} includes either @file{lisp-disunion.h} or
@file{lisp-union.h}, depending on whether @code{USE_UNION_TYPE} is
defined.  These files define the typedef of the Lisp object itself (as
described above) and the low-level macros that hide the actual
implementation of the Lisp object.  All extractor and constructor macros
for particular types of Lisp objects are defined in terms of these
low-level macros.

As a general rule, all typedefs should go into the typedefs section of
@file{lisp.h} rather than into a module-specific header file even if the
structure is defined elsewhere.  This allows function prototypes that
use the typedef to be placed into other header files.  Forward structure
declarations (i.e. a simple declaration like @code{struct foo;} where
the structure itself is defined elsewhere) should be placed into the
typedefs section as necessary.

@file{lrecord.h} contains the basic structures and macros that implement
all record-type Lisp objects---i.e. all objects whose type is a field
in their C structure, which includes all objects except the few most
basic ones.

@file{lisp.h} contains prototypes for most of the exported functions in
the various modules.  Lisp primitives defined using @code{DEFUN} that
need to be called by C code should be declared using @code{EXFUN}.
Other function prototypes should be placed either into the appropriate
section of @code{lisp.h}, or into a module-specific header file,
depending on how general-purpose the function is and whether it has
special-purpose argument types requiring definitions not in
@file{lisp.h}.)  All initialization functions are prototyped in
@file{symsinit.h}.



@example
@file{alloc.c}
@end example

The large module @file{alloc.c} implements all of the basic allocation and
garbage collection for Lisp objects.  The most commonly used Lisp
objects are allocated in chunks, similar to the Blocktype data type
described above; others are allocated in individually @code{malloc()}ed
blocks.  This module provides the foundation on which all other aspects
of the Lisp environment sit, and is the first module initialized at
startup.

Note that @file{alloc.c} provides a series of generic functions that are
not dependent on any particular object type, and interfaces to
particular types of objects using a standardized interface of
type-specific methods.  This scheme is a fundamental principle of
object-oriented programming and is heavily used throughout XEmacs.  The
great advantage of this is that it allows for a clean separation of
functionality into different modules---new classes of Lisp objects, new
event interfaces, new device types, new stream interfaces, etc. can be
added transparently without affecting code anywhere else in XEmacs.
Because the different subsystems are divided into general and specific
code, adding a new subtype within a subsystem will in general not
require changes to the generic subsystem code or affect any of the other
subtypes in the subsystem; this provides a great deal of robustness to
the XEmacs code.


@example
@file{eval.c}
@file{backtrace.h}
@end example

This module contains all of the functions to handle the flow of control.
This includes the mechanisms of defining functions, calling functions,
traversing stack frames, and binding variables; the control primitives
and other special forms such as @code{while}, @code{if}, @code{eval},
@code{let}, @code{and}, @code{or}, @code{progn}, etc.; handling of
non-local exits, unwind-protects, and exception handlers; entering the
debugger; methods for the subr Lisp object type; etc.  It does
@emph{not} include the @code{read} function, the @code{print} function,
or the handling of symbols and obarrays.

@file{backtrace.h} contains some structures related to stack frames and the
flow of control.



@example
@file{lread.c}
@end example

This module implements the Lisp reader and the @code{read} function,
which converts text into Lisp objects, according to the read syntax of
the objects, as described above.  This is similar to the parser that is
a part of all compilers.



@example
@file{print.c}
@end example

This module implements the Lisp print mechanism and the @code{print}
function and related functions.  This is the inverse of the Lisp reader
-- it converts Lisp objects to a printed, textual representation.
(Hopefully something that can be read back in using @code{read} to get
an equivalent object.)



@example
@file{general.c}
@file{symbols.c}
@file{symeval.h}
@end example

@file{symbols.c} implements the handling of symbols, obarrays, and
retrieving the values of symbols.  Much of the code is devoted to
handling the special @dfn{symbol-value-magic} objects that define
special types of variables---this includes buffer-local variables,
variable aliases, variables that forward into C variables, etc.  This
module is initialized extremely early (right after @file{alloc.c}),
because it is here that the basic symbols @code{t} and @code{nil} are
created, and those symbols are used everywhere throughout XEmacs.

@file{symeval.h} contains the definitions of symbol structures and the
@code{DEFVAR_LISP()} and related macros for declaring variables.



@example
@file{data.c}
@file{floatfns.c}
@file{fns.c}
@end example

These modules implement the methods and standard Lisp primitives for all
the basic Lisp object types other than symbols (which are described
above).  @file{data.c} contains all the predicates (primitives that return
whether an object is of a particular type); the integer arithmetic
functions; and the basic accessor and mutator primitives for the various
object types.  @file{fns.c} contains all the standard predicates for working
with sequences (where, abstractly speaking, a sequence is an ordered set
of objects, and can be represented by a list, string, vector, or
bit-vector); it also contains @code{equal}, perhaps on the grounds that
bulk of the operation of @code{equal} is comparing sequences.
@file{floatfns.c} contains methods and primitives for floats and floating-point
arithmetic.



@example
@file{bytecode.c}
@file{bytecode.h}
@end example

@file{bytecode.c} implements the byte-code interpreter and
compiled-function objects, and @file{bytecode.h} contains associated
structures.  Note that the byte-code @emph{compiler} is written in Lisp.




@node Modules for Standard Editing Operations, Modules for Interfacing with the File System, Basic Lisp Modules, The Modules of XEmacs
@section Modules for Standard Editing Operations
@cindex modules for standard editing operations
@cindex editing operations, modules for standard

@example
@file{buffer.c}
@file{buffer.h}
@file{bufslots.h}
@end example

@file{buffer.c} implements the @dfn{buffer} Lisp object type.  This
includes functions that create and destroy buffers; retrieve buffers by
name or by other properties; manipulate lists of buffers (remember that
buffers are permanent objects and stored in various ordered lists);
retrieve or change buffer properties; etc.  It also contains the
definitions of all the built-in buffer-local variables (which can be
viewed as buffer properties).  It does @emph{not} contain code to
manipulate buffer-local variables (that's in @file{symbols.c}, described
above); or code to manipulate the text in a buffer.

@file{buffer.h} defines the structures associated with a buffer and the various
macros for retrieving text from a buffer and special buffer positions
(e.g. @code{point}, the default location for text insertion).  It also
contains macros for working with buffer positions and converting between
their representations as character offsets and as byte offsets (under
MULE, they are different, because characters can be multi-byte).  It is
one of the largest header files.

@file{bufslots.h} defines the fields in the buffer structure that correspond to
the built-in buffer-local variables.  It is its own header file because
it is included many times in @file{buffer.c}, as a way of iterating over all
the built-in buffer-local variables.



@example
@file{insdel.c}
@file{insdel.h}
@end example

@file{insdel.c} contains low-level functions for inserting and deleting text in
a buffer, keeping track of changed regions for use by redisplay, and
calling any before-change and after-change functions that may have been
registered for the buffer.  It also contains the actual functions that
convert between byte offsets and character offsets.

@file{insdel.h} contains associated headers.



@example
@file{marker.c}
@end example

This module implements the @dfn{marker} Lisp object type, which
conceptually is a pointer to a text position in a buffer that moves
around as text is inserted and deleted, so as to remain in the same
relative position.  This module doesn't actually move the markers around
-- that's handled in @file{insdel.c}.  This module just creates them and
implements the primitives for working with them.  As markers are simple
objects, this does not entail much.

Note that the standard arithmetic primitives (e.g. @code{+}) accept
markers in place of integers and automatically substitute the value of
@code{marker-position} for the marker, i.e. an integer describing the
current buffer position of the marker.



@example
@file{extents.c}
@file{extents.h}
@end example

This module implements the @dfn{extent} Lisp object type, which is like
a marker that works over a range of text rather than a single position.
Extents are also much more complex and powerful than markers and have a
more efficient (and more algorithmically complex) implementation.  The
implementation is described in detail in comments in @file{extents.c}.

The code in @file{extents.c} works closely with @file{insdel.c} so that
extents are properly moved around as text is inserted and deleted.
There is also code in @file{extents.c} that provides information needed
by the redisplay mechanism for efficient operation. (Remember that
extents can have display properties that affect [sometimes drastically,
as in the @code{invisible} property] the display of the text they
cover.)



@example
@file{editfns.c}
@end example

@file{editfns.c} contains the standard Lisp primitives for working with
a buffer's text, and calls the low-level functions in @file{insdel.c}.
It also contains primitives for working with @code{point} (the default
buffer insertion location).

@file{editfns.c} also contains functions for retrieving various
characteristics from the external environment: the current time, the
process ID of the running XEmacs process, the name of the user who ran
this XEmacs process, etc.  It's not clear why this code is in
@file{editfns.c}.



@example
@file{callint.c}
@file{cmds.c}
@file{commands.h}
@end example

@cindex interactive
These modules implement the basic @dfn{interactive} commands,
i.e. user-callable functions.  Commands, as opposed to other functions,
have special ways of getting their parameters interactively (by querying
the user), as opposed to having them passed in a normal function
invocation.  Many commands are not really meant to be called from other
Lisp functions, because they modify global state in a way that's often
undesired as part of other Lisp functions.

@file{callint.c} implements the mechanism for querying the user for
parameters and calling interactive commands.  The bulk of this module is
code that parses the interactive spec that is supplied with an
interactive command.

@file{cmds.c} implements the basic, most commonly used editing commands:
commands to move around the current buffer and insert and delete
characters.  These commands are implemented using the Lisp primitives
defined in @file{editfns.c}.

@file{commands.h} contains associated structure definitions and prototypes.



@example
@file{regex.c}
@file{regex.h}
@file{search.c}
@end example

@file{search.c} implements the Lisp primitives for searching for text in
a buffer, and some of the low-level algorithms for doing this.  In
particular, the fast fixed-string Boyer-Moore search algorithm is
implemented in @file{search.c}.  The low-level algorithms for doing
regular-expression searching, however, are implemented in @file{regex.c}
and @file{regex.h}.  These two modules are largely independent of
XEmacs, and are similar to (and based upon) the regular-expression
routines used in @file{grep} and other GNU utilities.



@example
@file{doprnt.c}
@end example

@file{doprnt.c} implements formatted-string processing, similar to
@code{printf()} command in C.



@example
@file{undo.c}
@end example

This module implements the undo mechanism for tracking buffer changes.
Most of this could be implemented in Lisp.


@node Modules for Interfacing with the File System, Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System, Modules for Standard Editing Operations, The Modules of XEmacs
@section Modules for Interfacing with the File System
@cindex modules for interfacing with the file system
@cindex interfacing with the file system, modules for
@cindex file system, modules for interfacing with the

@example
@file{lstream.c}
@file{lstream.h}
@end example

These modules implement the @dfn{stream} Lisp object type.  This is an
internal-only Lisp object that implements a generic buffering stream.
The idea is to provide a uniform interface onto all sources and sinks of
data, including file descriptors, stdio streams, chunks of memory, Lisp
buffers, Lisp strings, etc.  That way, I/O functions can be written to
the stream interface and can transparently handle all possible sources
and sinks.  (For example, the @code{read} function can read data from a
file, a string, a buffer, or even a function that is called repeatedly
to return data, without worrying about where the data is coming from or
what-size chunks it is returned in.)

@cindex lstream
Note that in the C code, streams are called @dfn{lstreams} (for ``Lisp
streams'') to distinguish them from other kinds of streams, e.g. stdio
streams and C++ I/O streams.

Similar to other subsystems in XEmacs, lstreams are separated into
generic functions and a set of methods for the different types of
lstreams.  @file{lstream.c} provides implementations of many different
types of streams; others are provided, e.g., in @file{file-coding.c}.



@example
@file{fileio.c}
@end example

This implements the basic primitives for interfacing with the file
system.  This includes primitives for reading files into buffers,
writing buffers into files, checking for the presence or accessibility
of files, canonicalizing file names, etc.  Note that these primitives
are usually not invoked directly by the user: There is a great deal of
higher-level Lisp code that implements the user commands such as
@code{find-file} and @code{save-buffer}.  This is similar to the
distinction between the lower-level primitives in @file{editfns.c} and
the higher-level user commands in @file{commands.c} and
@file{simple.el}.



@example
@file{filelock.c}
@end example

This file provides functions for detecting clashes between different
processes (e.g. XEmacs and some external process, or two different
XEmacs processes) modifying the same file.  (XEmacs can optionally use
the @file{lock/} subdirectory to provide a form of ``locking'' between
different XEmacs processes.)  This module is also used by the low-level
functions in @file{insdel.c} to ensure that, if the first modification
is being made to a buffer whose corresponding file has been externally
modified, the user is made aware of this so that the buffer can be
synched up with the external changes if necessary.


@example
@file{filemode.c}
@end example

This file provides some miscellaneous functions that construct a
@samp{rwxr-xr-x}-type permissions string (as might appear in an
@file{ls}-style directory listing) given the information returned by the
@code{stat()} system call.



@example
@file{dired.c}
@file{ndir.h}
@end example

These files implement the XEmacs interface to directory searching.  This
includes a number of primitives for determining the files in a directory
and for doing filename completion. (Remember that generic completion is
handled by a different mechanism, in @file{minibuf.c}.)

@file{ndir.h} is a header file used for the directory-searching
emulation functions provided in @file{sysdep.c} (see section J below),
for systems that don't provide any directory-searching functions. (On
those systems, directories can be read directly as files, and parsed.)



@example
@file{realpath.c}
@end example

This file provides an implementation of the @code{realpath()} function
for expanding symbolic links, on systems that don't implement it or have
a broken implementation.



@node Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System, Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System, Modules for Interfacing with the File System, The Modules of XEmacs
@section Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System
@cindex modules for other aspects of the Lisp interpreter and object system
@cindex Lisp interpreter and object system, modules for other aspects of the
@cindex interpreter and object system, modules for other aspects of the Lisp
@cindex object system, modules for other aspects of the Lisp interpreter and

@example
@file{elhash.c}
@file{elhash.h}
@file{hash.c}
@file{hash.h}
@end example

These files provide two implementations of hash tables.  Files
@file{hash.c} and @file{hash.h} provide a generic C implementation of
hash tables which can stand independently of XEmacs.  Files
@file{elhash.c} and @file{elhash.h} provide a separate implementation of
hash tables that can store only Lisp objects, and knows about Lispy
things like garbage collection, and implement the @dfn{hash-table} Lisp
object type.


@example
@file{specifier.c}
@file{specifier.h}
@end example

This module implements the @dfn{specifier} Lisp object type.  This is
primarily used for displayable properties, and allows for values that
are specific to a particular buffer, window, frame, device, or device
class, as well as a default value existing.  This is used, for example,
to control the height of the horizontal scrollbar or the appearance of
the @code{default}, @code{bold}, or other faces.  The specifier object
consists of a number of specifications, each of which maps from a
buffer, window, etc. to a value.  The function @code{specifier-instance}
looks up a value given a window (from which a buffer, frame, and device
can be derived).


@example
@file{chartab.c}
@file{chartab.h}
@file{casetab.c}
@end example

@file{chartab.c} and @file{chartab.h} implement the @dfn{char table}
Lisp object type, which maps from characters or certain sorts of
character ranges to Lisp objects.  The implementation of this object
type is optimized for the internal representation of characters.  Char
tables come in different types, which affect the allowed object types to
which a character can be mapped and also dictate certain other
properties of the char table.

@cindex case table
@file{casetab.c} implements one sort of char table, the @dfn{case
table}, which maps characters to other characters of possibly different
case.  These are used by XEmacs to implement case-changing primitives
and to do case-insensitive searching.



@example
@file{syntax.c}
@file{syntax.h}
@end example

@cindex scanner
This module implements @dfn{syntax tables}, another sort of char table
that maps characters into syntax classes that define the syntax of these
characters (e.g. a parenthesis belongs to a class of @samp{open}
characters that have corresponding @samp{close} characters and can be
nested).  This module also implements the Lisp @dfn{scanner}, a set of
primitives for scanning over text based on syntax tables.  This is used,
for example, to find the matching parenthesis in a command such as
@code{forward-sexp}, and by @file{font-lock.c} to locate quoted strings,
comments, etc.

@c #### Break this out into a separate node somewhere!
Syntax codes are implemented as bitfields in an int.  Bits 0-6 contain
the syntax code itself, bit 7 is a special prefix flag used for Lisp,
and bits 16-23 contain comment syntax flags.  From the Lisp programmer's
point of view, there are 11 flags: 2 styles X 2 characters X @{start,
end@} flags for two-character comment delimiters, 2 style flags for
one-character comment delimiters, and the prefix flag.

Internally, however, the characters used in multi-character delimiters
will have non-comment-character syntax classes (@emph{e.g.}, the
@samp{/} in C's @samp{/*} comment-start delimiter has ``punctuation''
(here meaning ``operator-like'') class in C modes).  Thus in a mixed
comment style, such as C++'s @samp{//} to end of line, is represented by
giving @samp{/} the ``punctuation'' class and the ``style b first
character of start sequence'' and ``style b second character of start
sequence'' flags.  The fact that class is @emph{not} punctuation allows
the syntax scanner to recognize that this is a multi-character
delimiter.  The @samp{newline} character is given (single-character)
``comment-end'' @emph{class} and the ``style b first character of end
sequence'' @emph{flag}.  The ``comment-end'' class allows the scanner to
determine that no second character is needed to terminate the comment.

There used to be a syntax class @samp{Sextword}.  A character of
@samp{Sextword} class is a word-constituent but a word boundary may
exist between two such characters.  Ken'ichi HANDA <handa@@etl.go.jp>
explains the purpose of the Sextword syntax category:

@quotation
Japanese words are not separated by spaces, which makes finding word
boundaries very difficult.  Theoretically it's impossible without
using natural language processing techniques.  But, by defining
pseudo-words as below (much simplified for letting you understand it
easily) for Japanese, we can have a convenient forward-word function
for Japanese.

@display
A Japanese word is a sequence of characters that consists of
zero or more Kanji characters followed by zero or more
Hiragana characters.
@end display

Then, the problem is that now we can't say that a sequence of
word-constituents makes up a word.  For instance, both Hiragana "A"
and Kanji "KAN" are word-constituents but the sequence of these two
letters can't be a single word.

So, we introduced Sextword for Japanese letters.
@end quotation

There seems to have been some controversy about this category, as it has
been removed, readded, and removed again.  Currently neither GNU Emacs
(21.3.99) nor XEmacs (21.5.17) seems to use it.


@example
@file{casefiddle.c}
@end example

This module implements various Lisp primitives for upcasing, downcasing
and capitalizing strings or regions of buffers.



@example
@file{rangetab.c}
@end example

This module implements the @dfn{range table} Lisp object type, which
provides for a mapping from ranges of integers to arbitrary Lisp
objects.



@example
@file{opaque.c}
@file{opaque.h}
@end example

This module implements the @dfn{opaque} Lisp object type, an
internal-only Lisp object that encapsulates an arbitrary block of memory
so that it can be managed by the Lisp allocation system.  To create an
opaque object, you call @code{make_opaque()}, passing a pointer to a
block of memory.  An object is created that is big enough to hold the
memory, which is copied into the object's storage.  The object will then
stick around as long as you keep pointers to it, after which it will be
automatically reclaimed.

@cindex mark method
Opaque objects can also have an arbitrary @dfn{mark method} associated
with them, in case the block of memory contains other Lisp objects that
need to be marked for garbage-collection purposes. (If you need other
object methods, such as a finalize method, you should just go ahead and
create a new Lisp object type---it's not hard.)



@example
@file{abbrev.c}
@end example

This function provides a few primitives for doing dynamic abbreviation
expansion.  In XEmacs, most of the code for this has been moved into
Lisp.  Some C code remains for speed and because the primitive
@code{self-insert-command} (which is executed for all self-inserting
characters) hooks into the abbrev mechanism. (@code{self-insert-command}
is itself in C only for speed.)



@example
@file{doc.c}
@end example

This function provides primitives for retrieving the documentation
strings of functions and variables.  These documentation strings contain
certain special markers that get dynamically expanded (e.g. a
reverse-lookup is performed on some named functions to retrieve their
current key bindings).  Some documentation strings (in particular, for
the built-in primitives and pre-loaded Lisp functions) are stored
externally in a file @file{DOC} in the @file{lib-src/} directory and
need to be fetched from that file. (Part of the build stage involves
building this file, and another part involves constructing an index for
this file and embedding it into the executable, so that the functions in
@file{doc.c} do not have to search the entire @file{DOC} file to find
the appropriate documentation string.)



@example
@file{md5.c}
@end example

This function provides a Lisp primitive that implements the MD5 secure
hashing scheme, used to create a large hash value of a string of data such that
the data cannot be derived from the hash value.  This is used for
various security applications on the Internet.




@node Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System,  , Modules for Other Aspects of the Lisp Interpreter and Object System, The Modules of XEmacs
@section Modules for Interfacing with the Operating System
@cindex modules for interfacing with the operating system
@cindex interfacing with the operating system, modules for
@cindex operating system, modules for interfacing with the

@example
@file{process.el}
@file{process.c}
@file{process.h}
@end example

These modules allow XEmacs to spawn and communicate with subprocesses
and network connections.

@cindex synchronous subprocesses
@cindex subprocesses, synchronous
  @file{process.el} implements (through the @code{call-process}
primitive) what are called @dfn{synchronous subprocesses}.  This means
that XEmacs runs a program, waits till it's done, and retrieves its
output.  A typical example might be calling the @file{ls} program to get
a directory listing.

@cindex asynchronous subprocesses
@cindex subprocesses, asynchronous
  @file{process.c} and @file{process.h} implement @dfn{asynchronous
subprocesses}.  This means that XEmacs starts a program and then
continues normally, not waiting for the process to finish.  Data can be
sent to the process or retrieved from it as it's running.  This is used
for the @code{shell} command (which provides a front end onto a shell
program such as @file{csh}), the mail and news readers implemented in
XEmacs, etc.  The result of calling @code{start-process} to start a
subprocess is a process object, a particular kind of object used to
communicate with the subprocess.  You can send data to the process by
passing the process object and the data to @code{send-process}, and you
can specify what happens to data retrieved from the process by setting
properties of the process object. (When the process sends data, XEmacs
receives a process event, which says that there is data ready.  When
@code{dispatch-event} is called on this event, it reads the data from
the process and does something with it, as specified by the process
object's properties.  Typically, this means inserting the data into a
buffer or calling a function.) Another property of the process object is
called the @dfn{sentinel}, which is a function that is called when the
process terminates.

@cindex network connections
  Process objects are also used for network connections (connections to a
process running on another machine).  Network connections are started
with @code{open-network-stream} but otherwise work just like
subprocesses.



@example
@file{sysdep.c}
@file{sysdep.h}
@end example

  These modules implement most of the low-level, messy operating-system
interface code.  This includes various device control (ioctl) operations
for file descriptors, TTY's, pseudo-terminals, etc. (usually this stuff
is fairly system-dependent; thus the name of this module), and emulation
of standard library functions and system calls on systems that don't
provide them or have broken versions.



@example
@file{sysdir.h}
@file{sysfile.h}
@file{sysfloat.h}
@file{sysproc.h}
@file{syspwd.h}
@file{syssignal.h}
@file{systime.h}
@file{systty.h}
@file{syswait.h}
@end example

These header files provide consistent interfaces onto system-dependent
header files and system calls.  The idea is that, instead of including a
standard header file like @file{<sys/param.h>} (which may or may not
exist on various systems) or having to worry about whether all system
provide a particular preprocessor constant, or having to deal with the
four different paradigms for manipulating signals, you just include the
appropriate @file{sys*.h} header file, which includes all the right
system header files, defines and missing preprocessor constants,
provides a uniform interface onto system calls, etc.

@file{sysdir.h} provides a uniform interface onto directory-querying
functions. (In some cases, this is in conjunction with emulation
functions in @file{sysdep.c}.)

@file{sysfile.h} includes all the necessary header files for standard
system calls (e.g. @code{read()}), ensures that all necessary
@code{open()} and @code{stat()} preprocessor constants are defined, and
possibly (usually) substitutes sugared versions of @code{read()},
@code{write()}, etc. that automatically restart interrupted I/O
operations.

@file{sysfloat.h} includes the necessary header files for floating-point
operations.

@file{sysproc.h} includes the necessary header files for calling
@code{select()}, @code{fork()}, @code{execve()}, socket operations, and
the like, and ensures that the @code{FD_*()} macros for descriptor-set
manipulations are available.

@file{syspwd.h} includes the necessary header files for obtaining
information from @file{/etc/passwd} (the functions are emulated under
VMS).

@file{syssignal.h} includes the necessary header files for
signal-handling and provides a uniform interface onto the different
signal-handling and signal-blocking paradigms.

@file{systime.h} includes the necessary header files and provides
uniform interfaces for retrieving the time of day, setting file
access/modification times, getting the amount of time used by the XEmacs
process, etc.

@file{systty.h} buffers against the infinitude of different ways of
controlling TTY's.

@file{syswait.h} provides a uniform way of retrieving the exit status
from a @code{wait()}ed-on process (some systems use a union, others use
an int).



@example
@file{hpplay.c}
@file{libsst.c}
@file{libsst.h}
@file{libst.h}
@file{linuxplay.c}
@file{nas.c}
@file{sgiplay.c}
@file{sound.c}
@file{sunplay.c}
@end example

These files implement the ability to play various sounds on some types
of computers.  You have to configure your XEmacs with sound support in
order to get this capability.

@file{sound.c} provides the generic interface.  It implements various
Lisp primitives and variables that let you specify which sounds should
be played in certain conditions. (The conditions are identified by
symbols, which are passed to @code{ding} to make a sound.  Various
standard functions call this function at certain times; if sound support
does not exist, a simple beep results.

@cindex native sound
@cindex sound, native
@file{sgiplay.c}, @file{sunplay.c}, @file{hpplay.c}, and
@file{linuxplay.c} interface to the machine's speaker for various
different kind of machines.  This is called @dfn{native} sound.

@cindex sound, network
@cindex network sound
@cindex NAS
@file{nas.c} interfaces to a computer somewhere else on the network
using the NAS (Network Audio Server) protocol, playing sounds on that
machine.  This allows you to run XEmacs on a remote machine, with its
display set to your local machine, and have the sounds be made on your
local machine, provided that you have a NAS server running on your local
machine.

@file{libsst.c}, @file{libsst.h}, and @file{libst.h} provide some
additional functions for playing sound on a Sun SPARC but are not
currently in use.



@example
@file{tooltalk.c}
@file{tooltalk.h}
@end example

These two modules implement an interface to the ToolTalk protocol, which
is an interprocess communication protocol implemented on some versions
of Unix.  ToolTalk is a high-level protocol that allows processes to
register themselves as providers of particular services; other processes
can then request a service without knowing or caring exactly who is
providing the service.  It is similar in spirit to the DDE protocol
provided under Microsoft Windows.  ToolTalk is a part of the new CDE
(Common Desktop Environment) specification and is used to connect the
parts of the SPARCWorks development environment.



@example
@file{getloadavg.c}
@end example

This module provides the ability to retrieve the system's current load
average. (The way to do this is highly system-specific, unfortunately,
and requires a lot of special-case code.)



@example
@file{sunpro.c}
@end example

This module provides a small amount of code used internally at Sun to
keep statistics on the usage of XEmacs.



@example
@file{broken-sun.h}
@file{strcmp.c}
@file{strcpy.c}
@file{sunOS-fix.c}
@end example

These files provide replacement functions and prototypes to fix numerous
bugs in early releases of SunOS 4.1.



@example
@file{hftctl.c}
@end example

This module provides some terminal-control code necessary on versions of
AIX prior to 4.1.



@node The Build Configuration System, Rules When Writing New C Code, The Modules of XEmacs, Top
@chapter The Build Configuration System
@cindex build configuration
@cindex configuration, build

XEmacs makes extensive use of the external features provided by the
system it is running on.  Determining which features are present and
where they are located is the responsibility of the build configuration
system.

@menu
* The version.sh Script::
* Adding Configurable Features::  
* The configure Script::  
* The Makefile Precursors::  
@end menu



@node The version.sh Script, Adding Configurable Features, The Build Configuration System, The Build Configuration System
@section The version.sh Script
@cindex version.sh script
@cindex scripts, version.sh

The @file{version.sh} script is a snippet of Bourne shell script which
sets version variables.  By convention, these variables are given
descriptive names, all in lower case ASCII letters, with words separated
by underscores (@samp{_}, ASCII 0x5F).  They are converted to C
preprocessor macro definitions and added to @file{src/config.h} by
@file{configure}.  Thus each must have a corresponding @samp{#undef} in
@file{src/config.h.in}.  Each macro's name is the same as the shell
variable's, converted to all uppercase.  Finally, the macros are used to
initialize Lisp variables defined in @file{src/emacs.c}.  These Lisp
variables have the same name as the shell variables and preprocessor
macros, except that they obey the Lisp conventions that Lisp variable
names are all lowercase with words separated by hyphens (@samp{-}, ASCII
0x2D), while the C implementations are the same as the shell variable
with the letter @samp{V} (ASCII 0x56) prepended.

The file is updated by various release engineers and their scripts.
Other developers should have no need to edit this file.  The main
exception would be to add a branch tag and possibly other information to
@samp{xemacs_extra_name} to describe informal releases from a private
branch.  In particular, @samp{xemacs_release_date} and the
@samp{emacs_*_version} variables should refer to the most recent release
in the parent branch, so ``private branch'' maintainers should not
update them.  If the branch is significant and long-lasting, you might
enjoy assigning your own codenames.  (Of course, if you have no intent
of merging your changes to the mainline, you can do what you want with
any of the variables.  But in that case you should change the name of
the program, as well, in version strings and the like.)

Regarding the syntax of the file, it is simply a sequence of shell
variable assignments.  So the only thing that you can rely on is that
the shebang (the shell's interpreter comment, @code{#!/bin/sh}) will
occupy the first line of the file.  You should not count on order or
other comments being preserved.  On the other hand, some maintainers'
tools do depend on the order, so as much as possible your tools should
preserve the order of assignments.

Here is a table of the currently defined variables and their meanings (as
of February 2005):

@table @samp
@item #!/bin/sh
The shebang, making this an executable script on Unix.

@item emacs_is_beta
Set to @samp{t} when the release is a beta test release, otherwise null.

@item emacs_major_version
@itemx emacs_minor_version
@itemx emacs_beta_version
Strings containing decimal numbers representing the components of the
version of the source tree.  The name @samp{emacs_beta_version} is a
relic of the time when XEmacs had a two component version for public
releases.  Since XEmacs 21.1, both the beta series and the stable series
have three-component version numbers, and @samp{emacs_beta_version} holds
the lowest-order component of the stable series as well as the beta series.

@item xemacs_codename
An optional string containing a codename for the release.  Recent
maintainers have chosen humorous themes for their codenames, and
typically the names are used in alphabetical order.

@item emacs_kit_version
An optional string used for special branches.  (This should be
deprecated in favor of xemacs_extra_name.)

@item infodock_major_version
@itemx infodock_minor_version
@itemx infodock_build_version
Strings containing decimal numbers representing the components of the
version of the Infodock applied to the source tree.  (The Infodock
project has been in hibernation since XEmacs 21.1.9 or so; these
variables are unused in current XEmacsen.)

@item xemacs_extra_name
A string containing arbitrary additional information.  If length is
positive, it is automatically added to the version string after the
codename.

@item xemacs_release_date
A string containing the date of the latest release in the series in ISO
8601 format.  The time zone should not be present, it is defined to be
UTC.  Time is optional.  Not currently used in the version string.
@end table



@node Adding Configurable Features, The configure Script, The version.sh Script, The Build Configuration System
@section Adding Configurable Features
@cindex adding configurable features
@cindex configurable features, adding
@cindex features, adding configurable

Adding a configurable feature requires at the very least adding an
option to the @file{configure} script and a macro definition to
@file{src/config.h.in} (@pxref{The configure Script}), and often changes
to Makefile precursors (@pxref{The Makefile Precursors}).

Be prepared for the feature to be absent (even if you think that is
always present for a particular OS release) and work with
@code{--with-site-prefixes} to handle libraries and headers that are in
unusual locations.  There is no end to the strange ways in which systems
can be configured and XEmacs is expected to cope with anything thrown at
it.


@node The configure Script, The Makefile Precursors, Adding Configurable Features, The Build Configuration System
@section The configure Script
@cindex configure script
@cindex scripts, configure

At the heart of the XEmacs build configuration system is the
@file{configure} script.  This beast is maintained using the Autoconf
system, which is a truly terrifying monstrosity based on a fundamentally
flawed programming model (extensive use of macros), with an unpleasant
implementation (GNU @file{m4}), used to string together a large set of
@emph{ad hoc} tests, to implement a configuration language with
conventions that are unimportant in simple cases and counterintuitive
when things get complicated.  If that doesn't scare you off, Welcome! I
think you're ready to become a configure hacker!  (But be prepared for
things to go downhill from here.)

Unless you plan to develop autoconf macros, much of this complexity can
be removed by following the following rule:

@quotation
Always quote (ie surround with @samp{[]}) every argument to every
macro.  This includes macros that appear in the argument list of other
macros.
@end quotation

If this rule is followed and the macro produces incorrect results then
the macro is buggy.

@file{configure} is, of course, is written in POSIX shell language, and
autogenerated from a precursor.  As of March 2005 on the mainline the
precursor is called @file{configure.ac} and it is built using
@code{autoconf} 2.59.  Prior to that, and with XEmacs 21.4 and earlier
it was called @file{configure.in} and build using @code{autoconf} 2.13.
@code{autoconf} 2.5X is not completely backward compatible with
@code{autoconf} 2.13 so the XEmacs Project chose to stick with the devil
it knew for the stable line of XEmacs 21.4 releases.

One reason for worrying about the level of compatibility is the fact
that XEmacs uses a lot of homebrew code, including @file{m4} macros, to
implement special features in its @file{configure} script.  Here are
some of the important features:

@itemize
@item
Selectively enabling debugging, error checking, and tracing.
@item
Specifying options by either @code{--with} or @code{--enable}.
@item
Complex options, which are set-valued (@i{i.e.}, unordered; ordered
lists of options, for example ``take the first available from the
list,'' are neither used currently nor given special support).
@end itemize

Where these are implemented as @file{m4} macros, the prefix @samp{XE_}
is used to identify them as XEmacs features in the @file{configure}
precursor code.  Here is a list of prototypes of the convenience macros
provided for performing common operations:

@c #### @var{}-ize the formal parameters of these functions?
@table @code
@item USAGE_ERROR(string)
Prints a usage error and dies.

@item PRINT_VAR(var var ...)
Prints the name and value of the list of shell variables.

@item XE_ADD_OBJS(foo.o)
Appends the argument to the variable @code{extra_objs}.  This variable
goes to make up part of the link command line.  If the command line
argument @code{--verbose} is supplied a message is printed out.

@item XE_APPEND(value, varname)
Append the value (separated by a space) to the shell variable
@var{varname}.  @var{varname} should not be prefixed with a @samp{$}.
If the command line argument @code{--verbose} is supplied a message is
printed out.

@item XE_PREPEND(value, varname)
Prepend the value (separated by a space) to the shell variable
@var{varname}.  @var{varname} should not be prefixed with a @samp{$}.
If the command line argument @code{--verbose} is supplied a message is
printed out.

@item XE_DIE(message)
Used for situations that can't lead to a successful build, such as
missing include files or conflicts between requested features.

@item XE_CHECK_FEATURE_DEPENDENCY(feature1, feature2)
@code{--with-@var{feature1}} requires that @code{--with-@var{feature2}}
be also set and will die if the latter is not specified.

@item XE_STRIP_4TH_COMPONENT(var)
Converts the four part system name (eg @code{i986-pc-linux-gnu}) in
@var{var} to a three part names (eg @code{i986-pc-linux}).

@item CANONICALIZE_PATH(varname)
Strips automount brokenness from the path in @var{varname}.

@item XE_PROTECT_LINKER_FLAGS(shell_var)
Wrap the command line arguments in @var{shell_var} with suitable
incantations to ensure that the compiler front end passes them to the
linker.  Currently the magic is added only for gcc.

@item COLON_TO_SPACE(path)
Converts a colon separated list of paths into a space separated list of paths.

@item XE_ADD_RUNPATH_DIR(directory)
Internal function used by @code{XE_COMPUTE_RUNPATH}.

@item XE_COMPUTE_RUNPATH()
Calculate the appropriate dynamic library run path for XEmacs and the
value to the shell variable @code{ld_switch_run}.

@item XE_SPACE(var, words)
Append to @code{var} a space separated list of @code{words}.  

@item XE_SHLIB_STUFF
Generate the appropriate shared library support black magic. This is
implemented in the file @file{aclocal.m4}.
@end table

@heading XEmacs merged option support

Autoconf 2.59 divides the @file{configure} options into those that
specify features (@samp{--enable}) and those that specify external
libraries (@samp{--with}).  Many XEmacs options to not fall neatly into
either of these catagories and so as a matter of policy all options can
be specified by either method.

These merged options are declared with the @code{XE_MERGED_ARG} macro.
The arguments to the option are the same as @code{AC_ARG_WITH} and
@code{AC_ARG_ENABLE} and code that worked with either of these macros
will worked unchanged with @code{XE_MERGED_ARG}.  The option value is
stored in both @code{with_FEATURE} and @code{enable_FEATURE} shell
variables.

@table @code
@item XE_MERGED_ARG(package, help-string, action-if-true, action-if-false)
Declare an option that can be selected by either @samp{--enable} or
@samp{--with}.  The value of the option is stored in both
@code{with_FEATURE} and @code{enable_FEATURE}.

@end table

@heading XEmacs keyword option support

A @dfn{keyword} option is one that accepts one of a number of
pre-defined values (if support for sets of values is needed, x1see
``complex options'' below).  For example,
@samp{--with-mail-locking=flock}.

Keyword options are defined with an expanded form of
@samp{XE_MERGED_ARG} called @samp{XE_KEYWORD_ARG}, which taks 5
parameters.  The first 4 parameters are the same as original macro with
the exception that all of these four parameters are @strong{required}.
The @var{action-if-true} code is run after the argument list has been
parsed.

The 5th parameter is a list of supported keywords.  The whole list must
be quoted but the individual keywords should not.  Here is how the
@samp{mail-locking} flag is defined:

@example
XE_KEYWORD_ARG([mail-locking],
	AC_HELP_STRING([--with-mail-locking],[Specify the locking to be
                        used by movemail to prevent concurrent updates
                        of mail spool files. Valid types are `lockf',
                        `flock', `dot', `locking' or `mmdf'.]),
        [],
        [],
        [lockf,flock,file,locking,mmdf,pop])
@end example

(Note that the help string will be reformatted by @file{autoconf} so
that all whitespace is first compressed to a single space, then folded
to appear in the right-hand column as above.  Thus the help string may
appear differently when @code{./configure --help} is invoked.)

If the option value is a not a valid keyword then an error message is
generated, otherwise the value is left untouched.

This support is implemented via the following @file{GNU m4} macros.
Macros labeled @dfn{internal} are not expected to be used by
@file{configure.ac} programmers; they are part of the implementation of
higher-level features.

@table @code
@item XE_KEYWORD_ARG(package, help-string, action-if-true, action-if-false, [keyword1, keyword2, ....])
Expanded version of @code{XE_MERGED_ARG} for keyword options.  All the
parameters are required.  The last argument is a comma-separated list of
supported keywords, @file{m4}-quoted with @samp{[]}.

@item XE_PARSE_KEYWORD_OPTION(prefix, cmdline-flag)
Internal macro to parse the option values.  If an undeclared option is
found then an error is generated.

@item XE_KEYWORD(keyword)
Internal macro to convert the keyword list into the various forms needed
by @code{XE_PARSE_KEYWORD_OPTION}.

@end table

@heading XEmacs complex option support

A @dfn{complex option} is one that takes a number of related values, as
a set.  For example, we might use @code{--with-sound=native,nas} to play
sounds using the native libraries and via NAS.

Complex options are defined with an expanded form of
@samp{XE_MERGED_ARG} called @samp{XE_COMPLEX_ARG}, taking 5 parameters.
The first 4 parameters are the same as original macro with the exception
that all four parameters are @strong{required}.  The
@var{action-if-true} code is run after the argument list has been
parsed.

The 5th parameter is a list of @code{XE_COMPLEX_OPTION} macro calls that
define the valid components and their default values.  The list must be
quoted but the individual macro calls should not.  Here is how the
@samp{sound} flag is defined:

@example
XE_COMPLEX_ARG([sound],
	AC_HELP_STRING([--enable-sound],[Compile with sound support.
                        Valid types are `native', `nas' and `esd'.
                        Prefix a type with 'no' to disable.
                        The first type can be `none' or `all'.  `none' means
                        `nonative,nonas,noesd'.  `all' means `native,nas,esd'.
                        Later options override earlier ones for the same TYPE.
                        The default is to autodetect all sound support except 
                        for ESD which defaults to off.]),
	[],
	[enable_sound_nas=""],
	[XE_COMPLEX_OPTION([native],[""]),
	 XE_COMPLEX_OPTION([nas],[""]),
	 XE_COMPLEX_OPTION([esd],[no])])
@end example

@c #### verify for INSTALL and xemacs Texinfo.
Each option is interpreted as a separate feature to be enabled or
disabled.  As usual, the distinction between ``with'' and ``enable'' is
that ``with'' features require specific support from the system, usually
one or more optional libraries, and ``enable'' features are supported
entirely by code in XEmacs, but the user might want to switch it off for
some reason.  Option values are stored in the variables
@code{with_@var{package}_@var{component}} or
@code{enable_@var{feature}_@var{component}} (@i{e.g.} 
@code{enable_sound_native}).

The user of @code{configure} specifies the configuration by providing a
list of components.  The special components @samp{all} and @samp{none}
may occur first in the list, setting the defaults for all components to
@samp{yes} or @samp{no} respectively.

In @file{configure.ac}, default values of option values may be
@samp{yes} which means that the option must be used and an error must
occur if there is a configuration problems (such as a missing library)
or @samp{no} which means that the option must not be used.  The default
value can also be the null string @samp{""}, usually meaning that
@file{configure} will attempt to find support for the feature on the
system, and will enable the configuration if it is available.  Sometimes
the null string means that @code{configure}'s default is
system-dependent.  (This usage is not consistent, and depends on the
implementation of the feature detector rather than the argument parser.)
Users cannot specify the null string for an individual component from
the command line.

There are two possible uses in XEmacs for this kind of facility.  One is
exemplified by sound: there are alternative protocols (native, ESD, NAS)
and each is supported by a corresponding library.  The other is a single
library which may or may not be supported by multiple components of
XEmacs, as exemplified by Xft.  This latter usage may be more common
during development of a feature.  Perhaps specialized APIs should be
provided, see comment on @code{XE_COMPLEX_OPTION_HELP_STRING} below.

@table @code
@item XE_COMPLEX_OPTION(option, yesno)
Declare a complex option and its default value.  The value @strong{must}
be either @samp{yes} or @samp{no} or the null string @samp{""}.  The
null string means ``maybe'', whose semantics are determined by the
implementation of the option, not by the parser.  Typical semantics are
``use the library if found in the usual places'' or ``default is
platform-dependent''.

@item XE_COMPLEX_OPTION_HELP_STRING(flag, long, short, components, libraries)
Format a boilerplate help string for complex options.

This was originally written for the Xft option, and doesn't read so well
for options based on alternative libraries like sound.  Hackers beware:
the API may be enhanced to deal with this in the future.

@item XE_COMPLEX_ARG(PACKAGE, HELP-STRING, ACTION-IF-TRUE, ACTION-IF-FALSE, [XE_COMPLEX_OPTION(a,yes), ....])
Extended version of @code{XE_MERGED_ARG} for complex options.  All the
parameters are required.

@item XE_EXPAND_COMPLEX_OPTION(prefix, component, yesno)
Internal macro create the option's shell variable containing the default
value and to note the values in an option list.

@item XE_EXPAND_COMPLEX_OPTIONS(prefix, option_list)
Internal macro which recursively expands an option list.

@item XE_INIT_COMPLEX_OPTION(prefix, option_list)
Internal macro to initialise the complex option shell variables.

Variables of the form @samp{@var{prefix}_@var{option}} contain the
default value for that option.  @samp{@var{prefix}_types} contains a
space-separated list of all the options and @samp{@var{prefix}_default}
contains a comma-separated list of all the default values.

@item XE_PARSE_COMPLEX_OPTION(prefix, cmdline-flag)
Internal macro to parse the option values.  If an undeclared option is
found then an error is generated.

@end table



@node The Makefile Precursors, , The configure Script, The Build Configuration System
@section The Makefile Precursors
@cindex Makefile precursors
@cindex precursors, Makefile

As with other @code{autoconf} based programs, XEmacs's Makefiles are not
written, they are generated.  The @code{configure} program uses Makefile
precursors, or templates, to generate the actual Makefiles.  Unlike
other programs this is a multistage process.  The developer changes the
file @file{Makefile.in.in}, then @code{configure} first generates an
intermediate file @file{Makefile.in}, and finally produces a portable
Makefile called @file{Makefile}, and a Makefile optimized for @code{GNU
make} called @file{GNUmakefile}.

@file{Makefile.in.in} is run through the C preprocessor as part of this
process. This means that common files can be included and conditional
construction of the Makefile can occur.  When @file{GNUmakefile} is
being produced @code{USE_GNU_MAKE} is defined.

Comments in @file{Makefile.in.in} must start with @samp{##} to avoid
confusing the preprocessor.

@node Rules When Writing New C Code, Regression Testing XEmacs, The Build Configuration System, Top
@chapter Rules When Writing New C Code
@cindex writing new C code, rules when
@cindex C code, rules when writing new
@cindex code, rules when writing new C

The XEmacs C Code is extremely complex and intricate, and there are many
rules that are more or less consistently followed throughout the code.
Many of these rules are not obvious, so they are explained here.  It is
of the utmost importance that you follow them.  If you don't, you may
get something that appears to work, but which will crash in odd
situations, often in code far away from where the actual breakage is.

@menu
* Introduction to Writing C Code::  
* Writing New Modules::         
* Working with Lisp Objects::   
* Writing Lisp Primitives::     
* Writing Good Comments::       
* Adding Global Lisp Variables::  
* Writing Macros::              
* Proper Use of Unsigned Types::  
* Major Textual Changes::       
* Debugging and Testing::       
@end menu

See also @ref{Coding for Mule}.

@node Introduction to Writing C Code, Writing New Modules, Rules When Writing New C Code, Rules When Writing New C Code
@section Introduction to Writing C Code
@cindex introduction to writing c code
@cindex coding conventions

The C code is actually written in a dialect of C called @dfn{Clean C},
meaning that it can be compiled, warning-free, with either a C or C++
compiler.  Coding in Clean C has several advantages over plain
C.  C++ compilers are more nit-picking, and a number of coding errors
have been found by compiling with C++.  The ability to use both C and
C++ tools means that a greater variety of development tools are
available to the developer.  In addition, the ability to overload
operators in C++ means it is possible, for error-checking purposes, to
redefine certain simple types (normally defined as aliases for simple
built-in types such as @code{unsigned char} or @code{long}) as
classes, strictly limiting the permissible operations and catching
illegal implicit casts and such.

@c #### did Ben delete this, or just the CODING-STANDARDS file in ./etc?
XEmacs follows the GNU coding standards, which are documented
separately in @xref{top,,, standards, GNU Coding Standards}.  This
section mainly documents standards that are not included in that
document; typically this consists of standards that are specifically
relevant to the XEmacs code itself.

First, a recap of the GNU standards:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Put a space after every comma.
@item
Put a space before the parenthesis that begins a function call,
macro call, function declaration or definition, or control
statement (if, while, switch, for). (DO NOT do this for macro
definitions; this is invalid preprocessor syntax.)
@item
The brace that begins a control statement (if, while, for, switch,
do) or a function definition should go on a line by itself.
@item
In function definitions, put the return type and all other
qualifiers on a line before the function name.  Thus, the function
name is always at the beginning of a line.
@item
Indentation level is two spaces.  (However, the first and following
statements of a while/for/if/etc. block are indented four spaces
from the while/for/if keyword.  The opening and closing braces are
indented two spaces.)
@item
Variable and function names should be all lowercase, with underscores
separating words, except for a prefixing tag, which may be in
uppercase.  Do not use the mixed-case convention (e.g.
SetVariableToValue ()) and *especially* do not use Microsoft
Hungarian notation (char **rgszRedundantTag).
@item
preprocessor and enum constants should be all uppercase, and should
be prefixed with a tag that groups related constants together.
@end itemize

Now, the XEmacs coding standards:

@subheading Specially-prefixed functions/variables:

@itemize @bullet
@item
All global C variables whose value is constant and is a symbol begin
with a capital Q, e.g. Qkey_press_event. (The type will always be
Lisp_Object.)
@item
All other global C variables whose value is a Lisp_Object (this
includes variables that forward into Lisp variables plus others like
Vselected_console) begin with a capital V.
@item
No C variables whose value is other than a Lisp_Object should begin
with a capital V. (This includes C variables that forward into
integer or boolean Lisp variables.)
@item
All global C variables whose value is a struct Lisp_Subr begin with a
capital S. (This only occurs in connection with DEFUN ()).
@item
All C functions that are Lisp primitives begin with a capital F,
and no others should begin this way.
@end itemize

@subheading Functions for manipulating Lisp types:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Any function that creates an empty or mostly empty Lisp object
should begin allocate_(). (*Not* make_().) (Except, of course,
for Lisp primitives, which usually begin Fmake_()).
@item
Any function that converts a pointer into an equivalent Lisp_Object
should begin make_().
@item
Any function that converts a Lisp_Object into its equivalent pointer
and checks the type and validity of the object (e.g. making sure
it's not dead) should begin decode_().
@item
Any function that looks up a Lisp object (e.g. buffer, face) given
a symbol or string should begin get_(). (Except, of course, for
Lisp primitives, which usually begin Fget_()).
@end itemize

@subheading Other:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Any header-file declarations of the sort

struct foobar;

go into the "types" section of lisp.h.
@end itemize

@node Writing New Modules, Working with Lisp Objects, Introduction to Writing C Code, Rules When Writing New C Code
@section Writing New Modules
@cindex writing new modules

Every module includes @file{<config.h>} (angle brackets so that
@samp{--srcdir} works correctly; @file{config.h} may or may not be in
the same directory as the C sources) and @file{lisp.h}.  @file{config.h}
must always be included before any other header files (including
system header files) to ensure that certain tricks played by various
@file{s/} and @file{m/} files work out correctly.

When including header files, always use angle brackets, not double
quotes, except when the file to be included is always in the same
directory as the including file.  If either file is a generated file,
then that is not likely to be the case.  In order to understand why we
have this rule, imagine what happens when you do a build in the source
directory using @samp{./configure} and another build in another
directory using @samp{../work/configure}.  There will be two different
@file{config.h} files.  Which one will be used if you @samp{#include
"config.h"}?

Almost every module contains a @code{syms_of_*()} function and a
@code{vars_of_*()} function.  The former declares any Lisp primitives
you have defined and defines any symbols you will be using.  The latter
declares any global Lisp variables you have added and initializes global
C variables in the module.  @strong{Important}: There are stringent
requirements on exactly what can go into these functions.  See the
comment in @file{emacs.c}.  The reason for this is to avoid obscure
unwanted interactions during initialization.  If you don't follow these
rules, you'll be sorry!  If you want to do anything that isn't allowed,
create a @code{complex_vars_of_*()} function for it.  Doing this is
tricky, though: you have to make sure your function is called at the
right time so that all the initialization dependencies work out.

Declare each function of these kinds in @file{symsinit.h}.  Make sure
it's called in the appropriate place in @file{emacs.c}.  You never need
to include @file{symsinit.h} directly, because it is included by
@file{lisp.h}.

@strong{All global and static variables that are to be modifiable must
be declared uninitialized.}  This means that you may not use the
``declare with initializer'' form for these variables, such as @code{int
some_variable = 0;}.  The reason for this has to do with some kludges
done during the dumping process: If possible, the initialized data
segment is re-mapped so that it becomes part of the (unmodifiable) code
segment in the dumped executable.  This allows this memory to be shared
among multiple running XEmacs processes.  XEmacs is careful to place as
much constant data as possible into initialized variables during the
@file{temacs} phase.

@cindex copy-on-write
@strong{Please note:} This kludge only works on a few systems nowadays,
and is rapidly becoming irrelevant because most modern operating systems
provide @dfn{copy-on-write} semantics.  All data is initially shared
between processes, and a private copy is automatically made (on a
page-by-page basis) when a process first attempts to write to a page of
memory.

Formerly, there was a requirement that static variables not be declared
inside of functions.  This had to do with another hack along the same
vein as what was just described: old USG systems put statically-declared
variables in the initialized data space, so those header files had a
@code{#define static} declaration. (That way, the data-segment remapping
described above could still work.) This fails badly on static variables
inside of functions, which suddenly become automatic variables;
therefore, you weren't supposed to have any of them.  This awful kludge
has been removed in XEmacs because

@enumerate
@item
almost all of the systems that used this kludge ended up having
to disable the data-segment remapping anyway;
@item
the only systems that didn't were extremely outdated ones;
@item
this hack completely messed up inline functions.
@end enumerate

Here are things to know when you create a new source file:

@itemize @bullet
@item
All @file{.c} files should @code{#include <config.h>} first.  Almost all
@file{.c} files should @code{#include "lisp.h"} second.

@item
Generated header files should be included using the @samp{#include <...>}
syntax, not the @samp{#include "..."} syntax.  The generated headers are:

@file{config.h sheap-adjust.h paths.h Emacs.ad.h}

The basic rule is that you should assume builds using @samp{--srcdir}
and the @samp{#include <...>} syntax needs to be used when the
to-be-included generated file is in a potentially different directory
@emph{at compile time}.  The non-obvious C rule is that
@samp{#include "..."} means to search for the included file in the same
directory as the including file, @emph{not} in the current directory.
Normally this is not a problem but when building with @samp{--srcdir},
@file{make} will search the @samp{VPATH} for you, while the C compiler
knows nothing about it.

@item
Header files should @emph{not} include @samp{<config.h>} and
@samp{"lisp.h"}.  It is the responsibility of the @file{.c} files that
use it to do so.

@end itemize

@node Working with Lisp Objects, Writing Lisp Primitives, Writing New Modules, Rules When Writing New C Code
@section Working with Lisp Objects
@cindex working with lisp objects

@subheading Conventions involving Lisp objects

Of course the low-level implementation language of XEmacs is C, but much
of that uses the Lisp engine to do its work.  However, because the code
is ``inside'' of the protective containment shell around the ``reactor
core,'' you'll see lots of complex ``plumbing'' needed to do the work
and ``safety mechanisms,'' whose failure results in a meltdown.  This
section provides a quick overview (or review) of the various components
of the implementation of Lisp objects.

  Two typographic conventions help to identify C objects that implement
Lisp objects.  The first is that capitalized identifiers, especially
beginning with the letters @samp{Q}, @samp{V}, @samp{F}, and @samp{S},
for C variables and functions, and C macros with beginning with the
letter @samp{X}, are used to implement Lisp.  The second is that where
Lisp uses the hyphen @samp{-} in symbol names, the corresponding C
identifiers use the underscore @samp{_}.  Of course, since XEmacs Lisp
contains interfaces to many external libraries, those external names
will follow the coding conventions their authors chose, and may overlap
the ``XEmacs name space.''  However these cases are usually pretty
obvious.

  All Lisp objects are handled indirectly.  The @code{Lisp_Object}
type is usually a pointer to a structure, except for a very small number
of types with immediate representations (currently characters and
integers).  However, these types cannot be directly operated on in C
code, either, so they can also be considered indirect.  Types that do
not have an immediate representation always have a C typedef
@code{Lisp_@var{type}} for a corresponding structure.
@c #### mention l(c)records here?

  In older code, it was common practice to pass around pointers to
@code{Lisp_@var{type}}, but this is now deprecated in favor of using
@code{Lisp_Object} for all function arguments and return values that are
Lisp objects.  The @code{X@var{type}} macro is used to extract the
pointer and cast it to @code{(Lisp_@var{type} *)} for the desired type.

  @strong{Convention}: macros whose names begin with @samp{X} operate on
@code{Lisp_Object}s and do no type-checking.  Many such macros are type
extractors, but others implement Lisp operations in C (@emph{e.g.},
@code{XCAR} implements the Lisp @code{car} function).  These are unsafe,
and must only be used where types of all data have already been checked.
Such macros are only applied to @code{Lisp_Object}s.  In internal
implementations where the pointer has already been converted, the
structure is operated on directly using the C @code{->} member access
operator.

  The @code{@var{type}P}, @code{CHECK_@var{type}}, and
@code{CONCHECK_@var{type}} macros are used to test types.  The first
returns a Boolean value, and the latter signal errors.  (The
@samp{CONCHECK} variety allows execution to be CONtinued under some
circumstances, thus the name.)  Functions which expect to be passed user
data invariably call @samp{CHECK} macros on arguments.

  There are many types of specialized Lisp objects implemented in C, but
the most pervasive type is the @dfn{symbol}.  Symbols are used as
identifiers, variables, and functions.

  @strong{Convention}: Global variables whose names begin with @samp{Q}
are constants whose value is a symbol.  The name of the variable should
be derived from the name of the symbol using the same rules as for Lisp
primitives.  Such variables allow the C code to check whether a
particular @code{Lisp_Object} is equal to a given symbol.  Symbols are
Lisp objects, so these variables may be passed to Lisp primitives.  (An
alternative to the use of @samp{Q...} variables is to call the
@code{intern} function at initialization in the
@code{vars_of_@var{module}} function, which is hardly less efficient.)

  @strong{Convention}: Global variables whose names begin with @samp{V}
are variables that contain Lisp objects.  The convention here is that
all global variables of type @code{Lisp_Object} begin with @samp{V}, and
no others do (not even integer and boolean variables that have Lisp
equivalents). Most of the time, these variables have equivalents in
Lisp, which are defined via the @samp{DEFVAR} family of macros, but some
don't.  Since the variable's value is a @code{Lisp_Object}, it can be
passed to Lisp primitives.

  The implementation of Lisp primitives is more complex.
@strong{Convention}: Global variables with names beginning with @samp{S}
contain a structure that allows the Lisp engine to identify and call a C
function.  In modern versions of XEmacs, these identifiers are almost
always completely hidden in the @code{DEFUN} and @code{SUBR} macros, but
you will encounter them if you look at very old versions of XEmacs or at
GNU Emacs.  @strong{Convention}: Functions with names beginning with
@samp{F} implement Lisp primitives.  Of course all their arguments and
their return values must be Lisp_Objects.  (This is hidden in the
@code{DEFUN} macro.)

@subheading Working with Lisp lists

Lisp lists are popular data structures in the C code as well as in
Elisp.  There are two sets of macros that iterate over lists.
@code{EXTERNAL_LIST_LOOP_@var{n}} should be used when the list has been
supplied by the user, and cannot be trusted to be acyclic and
@code{nil}-terminated.  A @code{malformed-list} or @code{circular-list} error
will be generated if the list being iterated over is not entirely
kosher.  @code{LIST_LOOP_@var{n}}, on the other hand, is faster and less
safe, and can be used only on trusted lists.

Related macros are @code{GET_EXTERNAL_LIST_LENGTH} and
@code{GET_LIST_LENGTH}, which calculate the length of a list, and in the
case of @code{GET_EXTERNAL_LIST_LENGTH}, validating the properness of
the list.  The macros @code{EXTERNAL_LIST_LOOP_DELETE_IF} and
@code{LIST_LOOP_DELETE_IF} delete elements from a lisp list satisfying some
predicate.

@subheading Implementation of Lisp objects

At the lowest levels, XEmacs makes heavy use of object-oriented
techniques to promote code-sharing and uniform interfaces for different
devices and platforms.  Commonly, but not always, such objects are
``wrapped'' and exported to Lisp as Lisp objects.  Usually they use
the internal structures developed for Lisp objects (the @samp{lrecord}
structure) in order to take advantage of Lisp memory management.
Unfortunately, XEmacs was originally written in C, so these techniques
are based on heavy use of C macros.

@c You can't use @var{} for type below, because case is important.
A module defining a class is likely to use most of the following
declarations and macros.  In the following, the notation @samp{<type>}
will stand for the full name of the class, and will be capitalized in
the way normal for its context.  The notation @samp{<typ>} will stand
for the abbreviated form commonly used in macro names, while @samp{ty}
will be used as the typical name for instances of the class.  (See the
entry for @samp{MAYBE_<TY>METH} below for an example using all three
notations.)

In the interface (@file{.h} file), the following declarations are used
often.  Others may be used in for particular modules.  Since they're
quite short in most cases, the definitions are given as well.  The
generic macros used are defined in @file{lisp.h} or @file{lrecord.h}.

@c #### reorganize this table into stuff used in general code, and stuff
@c used only in declarations or initializations
@table @samp
@c #### declaration
@item typedef struct Lisp_<Type> Lisp_<Type>
This refers to the internal structure used by C code.  The XEmacs coding
style now forbids passing pointers to @samp{Lisp_<Type>} structures into
or out of a function; instead, a @samp{Lisp_Object} should be passed or
returned (created using @samp{wrap_<type>}, if necessary).

@c #### declaration
@item DECLARE_LRECORD (<type>, Lisp_<Type>)
Declares an @samp{lrecord} for @samp{<Type>}, which is the unit of
allocation.

@item #define X<TYPE>(x) XRECORD (x, <type>, Lisp_<Type>)
Turns a @code{Lisp_Object} into a pointer to @samp{struct Lisp_<Type>}.

@item #define wrap_<type>(p) wrap_record (p, <type>)
Turns a pointer to @samp{struct Lisp_<Type>} into a @code{Lisp_Object}.

@item #define <TYPE>P(x) RECORDP (x, <type>)
Tests whether a given @code{Lisp_Object} is of type @samp{Lisp_<Type>}.
Returns a C int, not a Lisp Boolean value.

@item #define CHECK_<TYPE>(x) CHECK_RECORD (x, <type>)
@itemx #define CONCHECK_<TYPE>(x) CONCHECK_RECORD (x, <type>)
Tests whether a given @code{Lisp_Object} is of type @samp{Lisp_<Type>},
and signals a Lisp error if not.  The @samp{CHECK} version of the macro
never returns if the type is wrong, while the @samp{CONCHECK} version
can return if the user catches it in the debugger and explicitly
requests a return.

@item #define RAW_<TYP>METH(ty, m) ((ty)->methods->m##_method)
Return a function pointer for the method for an object @var{TY} of class
@samp{Lisp_<Type>}, or @samp{NULL} if there is none for this type.

@item #define HAS_<TYP>METH_P(ty, m) (!!RAW_<TYP>METH (ty, m))
Test whether the class that @var{TY} is an instance of has the method.

@item #define <TYP>METH(ty, m, args) ((RAW_<TYP>METH (ty, m)) args)
Call the method on @samp{args}.  @samp{args} must be enclosed in
parentheses in the call.  It is the programmer's responsibility to
ensure that the method is available.  The standard convenience macro
@samp{MAYBE_<TYP>METH} is often provided for the common case where a
void-returning method of @samp{Type} is called.

@item #define MAYBE_<TYP>METH(ty, m, args) do @{ ... @} while (0)
Call a void-returning @samp{<Type>} method, if it exists.  Note the use
of the @samp{do ... while (0)} idiom to give the macro call C statement
semantics.  The full definition is equally idiomatic:

@example
#define MAYBE_<TYP>METH(ty, m, args) do @{	\
  Lisp_<Type> *maybe_<typ>meth_ty = (ty);	\
  if (HAS_<TYP>METH_P (maybe_<typ>meth_ty, m))	\
    <TYP>METH (maybe_<typ>meth_ty, m, args);	\
@} while (0)
@end example
@end table

The use of macros for invoking an object's methods makes life a bit
difficult for the student or maintainer when browsing the code.  In
particular, calls are of the form @samp{<TYP>METH (ty, some_method, (x,
y))}, but definitions typically are for @samp{<subtype>_some_method}.
Thus, when you are trying to find calls, you need to grep for
@samp{some_method}, but this will also catch calls and definitions of
that method for instances of other subtypes of @samp{<Type>}, and there
may be a rather large number of them.

@cindex Lisp object types, creating
@cindex creating Lisp object types
@cindex object types, creating Lisp
Here is a checklist of things to do when creating a new lisp object type
named @var{foo}:

@enumerate
@item
create @var{foo}.h
@item
create @var{foo}.c
@item
add definitions of @code{syms_of_@var{foo}}, etc. to @file{@var{foo}.c}
@item
add declarations of @code{syms_of_@var{foo}}, etc. to @file{symsinit.h}
@item
add calls to @code{syms_of_@var{foo}}, etc. to @file{emacs.c}
@item
add definitions of macros like @code{CHECK_@var{FOO}} and
@code{@var{FOO}P} to @file{@var{foo}.h}
@item
add the new type index to @code{enum lrecord_type}
@item
add a DEFINE_LRECORD_IMPLEMENTATION call to @file{@var{foo}.c}
@item
add an INIT_LRECORD_IMPLEMENTATION call to @code{syms_of_@var{foo}.c}
@end enumerate


@node Writing Lisp Primitives, Writing Good Comments, Working with Lisp Objects, Rules When Writing New C Code
@section Writing Lisp Primitives
@cindex writing Lisp primitives
@cindex Lisp primitives, writing
@cindex primitives, writing Lisp

Lisp primitives are Lisp functions implemented in C.  The details of
interfacing the C function so that Lisp can call it are handled by a few
C macros.  The only way to really understand how to write new C code is
to read the source, but we can explain some things here.

An example of a special form is the definition of @code{prog1}, from
@file{eval.c}.  (An ordinary function would have the same general
appearance.)

@cindex garbage collection protection
@smallexample
@group
DEFUN ("prog1", Fprog1, 1, UNEVALLED, 0, /*
Similar to `progn', but the value of the first form is returned.
\(prog1 FIRST BODY...): All the arguments are evaluated sequentially.
The value of FIRST is saved during evaluation of the remaining args,
whose values are discarded.
*/
       (args))
@{
  /* This function can GC */
  REGISTER Lisp_Object val, form, tail;
  struct gcpro gcpro1;

  val = Feval (XCAR (args));

  GCPRO1 (val);

  LIST_LOOP_3 (form, XCDR (args), tail)
    Feval (form);

  UNGCPRO;
  return val;
@}
@end group
@end smallexample

  Let's start with a precise explanation of the arguments to the
@code{DEFUN} macro.  Here is a template for them:

@example
@group
DEFUN (@var{lname}, @var{fname}, @var{min_args}, @var{max_args}, @var{interactive}, /*
@var{docstring}
*/
   (@var{arglist}))
@end group
@end example

@table @var
@item lname
This string is the name of the Lisp symbol to define as the function
name; in the example above, it is @code{"prog1"}.

@item fname
This is the C function name for this function.  This is the name that is
used in C code for calling the function.  The name is, by convention,
@samp{F} prepended to the Lisp name, with all dashes (@samp{-}) in the
Lisp name changed to underscores.  Thus, to call this function from C
code, call @code{Fprog1}.  Remember that the arguments are of type
@code{Lisp_Object}; various macros and functions for creating values of
type @code{Lisp_Object} are declared in the file @file{lisp.h}.

Primitives whose names are special characters (e.g. @code{+} or
@code{<}) are named by spelling out, in some fashion, the special
character: e.g. @code{Fplus()} or @code{Flss()}.  Primitives whose names
begin with normal alphanumeric characters but also contain special
characters are spelled out in some creative way, e.g. @code{let*}
becomes @code{FletX()}.

Each function also has an associated structure that holds the data for
the subr object that represents the function in Lisp.  This structure
conveys the Lisp symbol name to the initialization routine that will
create the symbol and store the subr object as its definition.  The C
variable name of this structure is always @samp{S} prepended to the
@var{fname}.  You hardly ever need to be aware of the existence of this
structure, since @code{DEFUN} plus @code{DEFSUBR} takes care of all the
details.

@item min_args
This is the minimum number of arguments that the function requires.  The
function @code{prog1} allows a minimum of one argument.

@item max_args
This is the maximum number of arguments that the function accepts, if
there is a fixed maximum.  Alternatively, it can be @code{UNEVALLED},
indicating a special form that receives unevaluated arguments, or
@code{MANY}, indicating an unlimited number of evaluated arguments (the
C equivalent of @code{&rest}).  Both @code{UNEVALLED} and @code{MANY}
are macros.  If @var{max_args} is a number, it may not be less than
@var{min_args} and it may not be greater than 8. (If you need to add a
function with more than 8 arguments, use the @code{MANY} form.  Resist
the urge to edit the definition of @code{DEFUN} in @file{lisp.h}.  If
you do it anyways, make sure to also add another clause to the switch
statement in @code{primitive_funcall().})

@item interactive
This is an interactive specification, a string such as might be used as
the argument of @code{interactive} in a Lisp function.  In the case of
@code{prog1}, it is 0 (a null pointer), indicating that @code{prog1}
cannot be called interactively.  A value of @code{""} indicates a
function that should receive no arguments when called interactively.

@item docstring
This is the documentation string.  It is written just like a
documentation string for a function defined in Lisp; in particular, the
first line should be a single sentence.  Note how the documentation
string is enclosed in a comment, none of the documentation is placed on
the same lines as the comment-start and comment-end characters, and the
comment-start characters are on the same line as the interactive
specification.  @file{make-docfile}, which scans the C files for
documentation strings, is very particular about what it looks for, and
will not properly extract the doc string if it's not in this exact format.

In order to make both @file{etags} and @file{make-docfile} happy, make
sure that the @code{DEFUN} line contains the @var{lname} and
@var{fname}, and that the comment-start characters for the doc string
are on the same line as the interactive specification, and put a newline
directly after them (and before the comment-end characters).

@item arglist
This is the comma-separated list of arguments to the C function.  For a
function with a fixed maximum number of arguments, provide a C argument
for each Lisp argument.  In this case, unlike regular C functions, the
types of the arguments are not declared; they are simply always of type
@code{Lisp_Object}.

The names of the C arguments will be used as the names of the arguments
to the Lisp primitive as displayed in its documentation, modulo the same
concerns described above for @code{F...} names (in particular,
underscores in the C arguments become dashes in the Lisp arguments).

There is one additional kludge: A trailing @samp{_} on the C argument is
discarded when forming the Lisp argument.  This allows C language
reserved words (like @code{default}) or global symbols (like
@code{dirname}) to be used as argument names without compiler warnings
or errors.

A Lisp function with @w{@var{max_args} = @code{UNEVALLED}} is a
@w{@dfn{special form}}; its arguments are not evaluated.  Instead it
receives one argument of type @code{Lisp_Object}, a (Lisp) list of the
unevaluated arguments, conventionally named @code{(args)}.

When a Lisp function has no upper limit on the number of arguments,
specify @w{@var{max_args} = @code{MANY}}.  In this case its implementation in
C actually receives exactly two arguments: the number of Lisp arguments
(an @code{int}) and the address of a block containing their values (a
@w{@code{Lisp_Object *}}).  In this case only are the C types specified
in the @var{arglist}: @w{@code{(int nargs, Lisp_Object *args)}}.

@end table

Within the function @code{Fprog1} itself, note the use of the macros
@code{GCPRO1} and @code{UNGCPRO}.  @code{GCPRO1} is used to ``protect''
a variable from garbage collection---to inform the garbage collector
that it must look in that variable and regard the object pointed at by
its contents as an accessible object.  This is necessary whenever you
call @code{Feval} or anything that can directly or indirectly call
@code{Feval} (this includes the @code{QUIT} macro!).  At such a time,
any Lisp object that you intend to refer to again must be protected
somehow.  @code{UNGCPRO} cancels the protection of the variables that
are protected in the current function.  It is necessary to do this
explicitly.

The macro @code{GCPRO1} protects just one local variable.  If you want
to protect two, use @code{GCPRO2} instead; repeating @code{GCPRO1} will
not work.  Macros @code{GCPRO3} and @code{GCPRO4} also exist.

These macros implicitly use local variables such as @code{gcpro1}; you
must declare these explicitly, with type @code{struct gcpro}.  Thus, if
you use @code{GCPRO2}, you must declare @code{gcpro1} and @code{gcpro2}.

@cindex caller-protects (@code{GCPRO} rule)
Note also that the general rule is @dfn{caller-protects}; i.e. you are
only responsible for protecting those Lisp objects that you create.  Any
objects passed to you as arguments should have been protected by whoever
created them, so you don't in general have to protect them.

In particular, the arguments to any Lisp primitive are always
automatically @code{GCPRO}ed, when called ``normally'' from Lisp code or
bytecode.  So only a few Lisp primitives that are called frequently from
C code, such as @code{Fprogn} protect their arguments as a service to
their caller.  You don't need to protect your arguments when writing a
new @code{DEFUN}.

@code{GCPRO}ing is perhaps the trickiest and most error-prone part of
XEmacs coding.  It is @strong{extremely} important that you get this
right and use a great deal of discipline when writing this code.
@xref{GCPROing, ,@code{GCPRO}ing}, for full details on how to do this.

What @code{DEFUN} actually does is declare a global structure of type
@code{Lisp_Subr} whose name begins with capital @samp{SF} and which
contains information about the primitive (e.g. a pointer to the
function, its minimum and maximum allowed arguments, a string describing
its Lisp name); @code{DEFUN} then begins a normal C function declaration
using the @code{F...} name.  The Lisp subr object that is the function
definition of a primitive (i.e. the object in the function slot of the
symbol that names the primitive) actually points to this @samp{SF}
structure; when @code{Feval} encounters a subr, it looks in the
structure to find out how to call the C function.

Defining the C function is not enough to make a Lisp primitive
available; you must also create the Lisp symbol for the primitive (the
symbol is @dfn{interned}; @pxref{Obarrays}) and store a suitable subr
object in its function cell. (If you don't do this, the primitive won't
be seen by Lisp code.) The code looks like this:

@example
DEFSUBR (@var{fname});
@end example

@noindent
Here @var{fname} is the same name you used as the second argument to
@code{DEFUN}.

This call to @code{DEFSUBR} should go in the @code{syms_of_*()} function
at the end of the module.  If no such function exists, create it and
make sure to also declare it in @file{symsinit.h} and call it from the
appropriate spot in @code{main()}.  @xref{Writing New Modules}.

Note that C code cannot call functions by name unless they are defined
in C.  The way to call a function written in Lisp from C is to use
@code{Ffuncall}, which embodies the Lisp function @code{funcall}.  Since
the Lisp function @code{funcall} accepts an unlimited number of
arguments, in C it takes two: the number of Lisp-level arguments, and a
one-dimensional array containing their values.  The first Lisp-level
argument is the Lisp function to call, and the rest are the arguments to
pass to it.  Since @code{Ffuncall} can call the evaluator, you must
protect pointers from garbage collection around the call to
@code{Ffuncall}. (However, @code{Ffuncall} explicitly protects all of
its parameters, so you don't have to protect any pointers passed as
parameters to it.)

The C functions @code{call0}, @code{call1}, @code{call2}, and so on,
provide handy ways to call a Lisp function conveniently with a fixed
number of arguments.  They work by calling @code{Ffuncall}.

@file{eval.c} is a very good file to look through for examples;
@file{lisp.h} contains the definitions for important macros and
functions.

@node Writing Good Comments, Adding Global Lisp Variables, Writing Lisp Primitives, Rules When Writing New C Code
@section Writing Good Comments
@cindex writing good comments
@cindex comments, writing good

Comments are a lifeline for programmers trying to understand tricky
code.  In general, the less obvious it is what you are doing, the more
you need a comment, and the more detailed it needs to be.  You should
always be on guard when you're writing code for stuff that's tricky, and
should constantly be putting yourself in someone else's shoes and asking
if that person could figure out without much difficulty what's going
on. (Assume they are a competent programmer who understands the
essentials of how the XEmacs code is structured but doesn't know much
about the module you're working on or any algorithms you're using.) If
you're not sure whether they would be able to, add a comment.  Always
err on the side of more comments, rather than less.

Generally, when making comments, there is no need to attribute them with
your name or initials.  This especially goes for small,
easy-to-understand, non-opinionated ones.  Also, comments indicating
where, when, and by whom a file was changed are @emph{strongly}
discouraged, and in general will be removed as they are discovered.
This is exactly what @file{ChangeLogs} are there for.  However, it can
occasionally be useful to mark exactly where (but not when or by whom)
changes are made, particularly when making small changes to a file
imported from elsewhere.  These marks help when later on a newer version
of the file is imported and the changes need to be merged. (If
everything were always kept in CVS, there would be no need for this.
But in practice, this often doesn't happen, or the CVS repository is
later on lost or unavailable to the person doing the update.)

When putting in an explicit opinion in a comment, you should
@emph{always} attribute it with your name and the date.  This also goes
for long, complex comments explaining in detail the workings of
something -- by putting your name there, you make it possible for
someone who has questions about how that thing works to determine who
wrote the comment so they can write to them.  Use your actual name or
your alias at xemacs.org, and not your initials or nickname, unless that
is generally recognized (e.g. @samp{jwz}).  Even then, please consider
requesting a virtual user at xemacs.org (forwarding address; we can't
provide an actual mailbox).  Otherwise, give first and last name.  If
you're not a regular contributor, you might consider putting your email
address in -- it may be in the ChangeLog, but after awhile ChangeLogs
have a tendency of disappearing or getting muddled.  (E.g. your comment
may get copied somewhere else or even into another program, and tracking
down the proper ChangeLog may be very difficult.)

If you come across an opinion that is not or is no longer valid, or you
come across any comment that no longer applies but you want to keep it
around, enclose it in @samp{[[ } and @samp{ ]]} marks and add a comment
afterwards explaining why the preceding comment is no longer valid.  Put
your name on this comment, as explained above.

Just as comments are a lifeline to programmers, incorrect comments are
death.  If you come across an incorrect comment, @strong{immediately}
correct it or flag it as incorrect, as described in the previous
paragraph.  Whenever you work on a section of code, @emph{always} make
sure to update any comments to be correct -- or, at the very least, flag
them as incorrect.

To indicate a "todo" or other problem, use four pound signs --
i.e. @samp{####}.

@node Adding Global Lisp Variables, Writing Macros, Writing Good Comments, Rules When Writing New C Code
@section Adding Global Lisp Variables
@cindex global Lisp variables, adding
@cindex variables, adding global Lisp

Global variables whose names begin with @samp{Q} are constants whose
value is a symbol of a particular name.  The name of the variable should
be derived from the name of the symbol using the same rules as for Lisp
primitives.  These variables are initialized using a call to
@code{defsymbol()} in the @code{syms_of_*()} function. (This call
interns a symbol, sets the C variable to the resulting Lisp object, and
calls @code{staticpro()} on the C variable to tell the
garbage-collection mechanism about this variable.  What
@code{staticpro()} does is add a pointer to the variable to a large
global array; when garbage-collection happens, all pointers listed in
the array are used as starting points for marking Lisp objects.  This is
important because it's quite possible that the only current reference to
the object is the C variable.  In the case of symbols, the
@code{staticpro()} doesn't matter all that much because the symbol is
contained in @code{obarray}, which is itself @code{staticpro()}ed.
However, it's possible that a naughty user could do something like
uninterning the symbol out of @code{obarray} or even setting
@code{obarray} to a different value [although this is likely to make
XEmacs crash!].)

  @strong{Please note:} It is potentially deadly if you declare a
@samp{Q...}  variable in two different modules.  The two calls to
@code{defsymbol()} are no problem, but some linkers will complain about
multiply-defined symbols.  The most insidious aspect of this is that
often the link will succeed anyway, but then the resulting executable
will sometimes crash in obscure ways during certain operations!

To avoid this problem, declare any symbols with common names (such as
@code{text}) that are not obviously associated with this particular
module in the file @file{general-slots.h}.  The ``-slots'' suffix
indicates that this is a file that is included multiple times in
@file{general.c}.  Redefinition of preprocessor macros allows the
effects to be different in each context, so this is actually more
convenient and less error-prone than doing it in your module.

  Global variables whose names begin with @samp{V} are variables that
contain Lisp objects.  The convention here is that all global variables
of type @code{Lisp_Object} begin with @samp{V}, and all others don't
(including integer and boolean variables that have Lisp
equivalents). Most of the time, these variables have equivalents in
Lisp, but some don't.  Those that do are declared this way by a call to
@code{DEFVAR_LISP()} in the @code{vars_of_*()} initializer for the
module.  What this does is create a special @dfn{symbol-value-forward}
Lisp object that contains a pointer to the C variable, intern a symbol
whose name is as specified in the call to @code{DEFVAR_LISP()}, and set
its value to the symbol-value-forward Lisp object; it also calls
@code{staticpro()} on the C variable to tell the garbage-collection
mechanism about the variable.  When @code{eval} (or actually
@code{symbol-value}) encounters this special object in the process of
retrieving a variable's value, it follows the indirection to the C
variable and gets its value.  @code{setq} does similar things so that
the C variable gets changed.

  Whether or not you @code{DEFVAR_LISP()} a variable, you need to
initialize it in the @code{vars_of_*()} function; otherwise it will end
up as all zeroes, which is the integer 0 (@emph{not} @code{nil}), and
this is probably not what you want.  Also, if the variable is not
@code{DEFVAR_LISP()}ed, @strong{you must call} @code{staticpro()} on the
C variable in the @code{vars_of_*()} function.  Otherwise, the
garbage-collection mechanism won't know that the object in this variable
is in use, and will happily collect it and reuse its storage for another
Lisp object, and you will be the one who's unhappy when you can't figure
out how your variable got overwritten.

@node Writing Macros, Proper Use of Unsigned Types, Adding Global Lisp Variables, Rules When Writing New C Code
@section Writing Macros
@cindex writing macros
@cindex macros, writing

Heavily used small code fragments need to be fast.  The traditional way
to implement such code fragments in C is with macros.  But macros in C
are known to be broken.

@cindex macro hygiene
Macro arguments that are repeatedly evaluated may suffer from repeated
side effects or suboptimal performance.

Variable names used in macros may collide with caller's variables,
causing (at least) unwanted compiler warnings.

In order to solve these problems, and maintain statement semantics,
one should use the @code{do @{ ... @} while (0)} trick (which safely
works inside of if statements) while trying to reference macro
arguments exactly once using local variables.

Let's take a look at this poor macro definition:

@example
#define MARK_OBJECT(obj) \
  if (!marked_p (obj)) mark_object (obj), did_mark = 1
@end example

This macro evaluates its argument twice, and also fails if used like this:
@example
  if (flag) MARK_OBJECT (obj); else @code{do_something()};
@end example

A much better definition is

@example
#define MARK_OBJECT(obj) do @{ \
  Lisp_Object mo_obj = (obj); \
  if (!marked_p (mo_obj))     \
    @{                         \
      mark_object (mo_obj);   \
      did_mark = 1;           \
    @}                         \
@} while (0)
@end example

Notice the elimination of double evaluation by using the local variable
with the obscure name.  Writing safe and efficient macros requires great
care.  The one problem with macros that cannot be portably worked around
is, since a C block has no value, a macro used as an expression rather
than a statement cannot use the techniques just described to avoid
multiple evaluation.

@cindex inline functions
In most cases where a macro has function semantics, an inline function
is a better implementation technique.  Modern compiler optimizers tend
to inline functions even if they have no @code{inline} keyword, and
configure magic ensures that the @code{inline} keyword can be safely
used as an additional compiler hint.  Inline functions used in a single
.c files are easy.  The function must already be defined to be
@code{static}.  Just add another @code{inline} keyword to the
definition.

@example
inline static int
heavily_used_small_function (int arg)
@{
  ...
@}
@end example

Inline functions in header files are trickier, because we would like to
make the following optimization if the function is @emph{not} inlined
(for example, because we're compiling for debugging).  We would like the
function to be defined externally exactly once, and each calling
translation unit would create an external reference to the function,
instead of including a definition of the inline function in the object
code of every translation unit that uses it.  This optimization is
currently only available for gcc.  But you don't have to worry about the
trickiness; just define your inline functions in header files using this
pattern:

@example
DECLARE_INLINE_HEADER (
int
i_used_to_be_a_crufty_macro_but_look_at_me_now (int arg)
)
@{
  ...
@}
@end example

We use @code{DECLARE_INLINE_HEADER} rather than just the modifier
@code{INLINE_HEADER} to prevent warnings when compiling with @code{gcc
-Wmissing-declarations}.  I consider issuing this warning for inline
functions a gcc bug, but the gcc maintainers disagree.

@cindex inline functions, headers
@cindex header files, inline functions
Every header which contains inline functions, either directly by using
@code{DECLARE_INLINE_HEADER} or indirectly by using @code{DECLARE_LRECORD} must
be added to @file{inline.c}'s includes to make the optimization
described above work.  (Optimization note: if all INLINE_HEADER
functions are in fact inlined in all translation units, then the linker
can just discard @code{inline.o}, since it contains only unreferenced code).

The three golden rules of macros:

@enumerate
@item
Anything that's an lvalue can be evaluated more than once.
@item
Macros where anything else can be evaluated more than once should
have the word "unsafe" in their name (exceptions may be made for
large sets of macros that evaluate arguments of certain types more
than once, e.g. struct buffer * arguments, when clearly indicated in
the macro documentation).  These macros are generally meant to be
called only by other macros that have already stored the calling
values in temporary variables.
@item
Nothing else can be evaluated more than once.  Use inline
functions, if necessary, to prevent multiple evaluation.
@end enumerate

NOTE: The functions and macros below are given full prototypes in their
docs, even when the implementation is a macro.  In such cases, passing
an argument of a type other than expected will produce undefined
results.  Also, given that macros can do things functions can't (in
particular, directly modify arguments as if they were passed by
reference), the declaration syntax has been extended to include the
call-by-reference syntax from C++, where an & after a type indicates
that the argument is an lvalue and is passed by reference, i.e. the
function can modify its value. (This is equivalent in C to passing a
pointer to the argument, but without the need to explicitly worry about
pointers.)

When to capitalize macros:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Capitalize macros doing stuff obviously impossible with (C)
functions, e.g. directly modifying arguments as if they were passed by
reference.
@item
Capitalize macros that evaluate @strong{any} argument more than once regardless
of whether that's "allowed" (e.g. buffer arguments).
@item
Capitalize macros that directly access a field in a Lisp_Object or
its equivalent underlying structure.  In such cases, access through the
Lisp_Object precedes the macro with an X, and access through the underlying
structure doesn't.
@item
Capitalize certain other basic macros relating to Lisp_Objects; e.g.
FRAMEP, CHECK_FRAME, etc.
@item
Try to avoid capitalizing any other macros.
@end itemize

@node Proper Use of Unsigned Types, Major Textual Changes, Writing Macros, Rules When Writing New C Code
@section Proper Use of Unsigned Types
@cindex unsigned types, proper use of
@cindex types, proper use of unsigned

Avoid using @code{unsigned int} and @code{unsigned long} whenever
possible.  Unsigned types are viral -- any arithmetic or comparisons
involving mixed signed and unsigned types are automatically converted to
unsigned, which is almost certainly not what you want.  Many subtle and
hard-to-find bugs are created by careless use of unsigned types.  In
general, you should almost @emph{never} use an unsigned type to hold a
regular quantity of any sort.  The only exceptions are

@enumerate
@item
When there's a reasonable possibility you will actually need all 32 or
64 bits to store the quantity.
@item
When calling existing APIs that require unsigned types.  In this case,
you should still do all manipulation using signed types, and do the
conversion at the very threshold of the API call.
@item
In existing code that you don't want to modify because you don't
maintain it.
@item
In bit-field structures.
@end enumerate

Other reasonable uses of @code{unsigned int} and @code{unsigned long}
are representing non-quantities -- e.g. bit-oriented flags and such.

@node Major Textual Changes, Debugging and Testing, Proper Use of Unsigned Types, Rules When Writing New C Code
@section Major Textual Changes
@cindex textual changes, major
@cindex major textual changes

Sometimes major textual changes are made to the source.  This means that
a search-and-replace is done to change type names and such.  Some people
disagree with such changes, and certainly if done without good reason
will just lead to headaches.  But it's important to keep the code clean
and understable, and consistent naming goes a long way towards this.

An example of the right way to do this was the so-called "great integral
type renaming".

@menu
* Great Integral Type Renaming::  
* Text/Char Type Renaming::     
@end menu

@node Great Integral Type Renaming, Text/Char Type Renaming, Major Textual Changes, Major Textual Changes
@subsection Great Integral Type Renaming
@cindex Great Integral Type Renaming
@cindex integral type renaming, great
@cindex type renaming, integral
@cindex renaming, integral types

The purpose of this is to rationalize the names used for various
integral types, so that they match their intended uses and follow
consist conventions, and eliminate types that were not semantically
different from each other.

The conventions are:

@itemize @bullet
@item
All integral types that measure quantities of anything are signed.  Some
people disagree vociferously with this, but their arguments are mostly
theoretical, and are vastly outweighed by the practical headaches of
mixing signed and unsigned values, and more importantly by the far
increased likelihood of inadvertent bugs: Because of the broken "viral"
nature of unsigned quantities in C (operations involving mixed
signed/unsigned are done unsigned, when exactly the opposite is nearly
always wanted), even a single error in declaring a quantity unsigned
that should be signed, or even the even more subtle error of comparing
signed and unsigned values and forgetting the necessary cast, can be
catastrophic, as comparisons will yield wrong results.  -Wsign-compare
is turned on specifically to catch this, but this tends to result in a
great number of warnings when mixing signed and unsigned, and the casts
are annoying.  More has been written on this elsewhere.

@item
All such quantity types just mentioned boil down to EMACS_INT, which is
32 bits on 32-bit machines and 64 bits on 64-bit machines.  This is
guaranteed to be the same size as Lisp objects of type @code{int}, and (as
far as I can tell) of size_t (unsigned!) and ssize_t.  The only type
below that is not an EMACS_INT is Hashcode, which is an unsigned value
of the same size as EMACS_INT.

@item
Type names should be relatively short (no more than 10 characters or
so), with the first letter capitalized and no underscores if they can at
all be avoided.

@item
"count" == a zero-based measurement of some quantity.  Includes sizes,
offsets, and indexes.

@item
"bpos" == a one-based measurement of a position in a buffer.  "Charbpos"
and "Bytebpos" count text in the buffer, rather than bytes in memory;
thus Bytebpos does not directly correspond to the memory representation.
Use "Membpos" for this.

@item
"Char" refers to internal-format characters, not to the C type "char",
which is really a byte.
@end itemize

For the actual name changes, see the script below.

I ran the following script to do the conversion. (NOTE: This script is
idempotent.  You can safely run it multiple times and it will not screw
up previous results -- in fact, it will do nothing if nothing has
changed.  Thus, it can be run repeatedly as necessary to handle patches
coming in from old workspaces, or old branches.)  There are two tags,
just before and just after the change: @samp{pre-integral-type-rename}
and @samp{post-integral-type-rename}.  When merging code from the main
trunk into a branch, the best thing to do is first merge up to
@samp{pre-integral-type-rename}, then apply the script and associated
changes, then merge from @samp{post-integral-type-change} to the
present. (Alternatively, just do the merging in one operation; but you
may then have a lot of conflicts needing to be resolved by hand.)

Script @samp{fixtypes.sh} follows:

@example
----------------------------------- cut ------------------------------------
files="*.[ch] s/*.h m/*.h config.h.in ../configure.in Makefile.in.in ../lib-src/*.[ch] ../lwlib/*.[ch]"
gr Memory_Count Bytecount $files
gr Lstream_Data_Count Bytecount $files
gr Element_Count Elemcount $files
gr Hash_Code Hashcode $files
gr extcount bytecount $files
gr bufpos charbpos $files
gr bytind bytebpos $files
gr memind membpos $files
gr bufbyte intbyte $files
gr Extcount Bytecount $files
gr Bufpos Charbpos $files
gr Bytind Bytebpos $files
gr Memind Membpos $files
gr Bufbyte Intbyte $files
gr EXTCOUNT BYTECOUNT $files
gr BUFPOS CHARBPOS $files
gr BYTIND BYTEBPOS $files
gr MEMIND MEMBPOS $files
gr BUFBYTE INTBYTE $files
gr MEMORY_COUNT BYTECOUNT $files
gr LSTREAM_DATA_COUNT BYTECOUNT $files
gr ELEMENT_COUNT ELEMCOUNT $files
gr HASH_CODE HASHCODE $files
----------------------------------- cut ------------------------------------
@end example

The @samp{gr} script, and the scripts it uses, are documented in
@file{README.global-renaming}, because if placed in this file they would
need to have their @@ characters doubled, meaning you couldn't easily
cut and paste from the source.

In addition to those programs, I needed to fix up a few other
things, particularly relating to the duplicate definitions of
types, now that some types merged with others.  Specifically:

@enumerate
@item
in @file{lisp.h}, removed duplicate declarations of Bytecount.  The changed
code should now look like this: (In each code snippet below, the first
and last lines are the same as the original, as are all lines outside of
those lines.  That allows you to locate the section to be replaced, and
replace the stuff in that section, verifying that there isn't anything
new added that would need to be kept.)

@example
--------------------------------- snip -------------------------------------
/* Counts of bytes or chars */
typedef EMACS_INT Bytecount;
typedef EMACS_INT Charcount;

/* Counts of elements */
typedef EMACS_INT Elemcount;

/* Hash codes */
typedef unsigned long Hashcode;

/* ------------------------ dynamic arrays ------------------- */
--------------------------------- snip -------------------------------------
@end example

@item 
in @file{lstream.h}, removed duplicate declaration of Bytecount.  Rewrote the
comment about this type.  The changed code should now look like this:

@example
--------------------------------- snip -------------------------------------
#endif

/* The have been some arguments over the what the type should be that
   specifies a count of bytes in a data block to be written out or read in,
   using @code{Lstream_read()}, @code{Lstream_write()}, and related functions.
   Originally it was long, which worked fine; Martin "corrected" these to
   size_t and ssize_t on the grounds that this is theoretically cleaner and
   is in keeping with the C standards.  Unfortunately, this practice is
   horribly error-prone due to design flaws in the way that mixed
   signed/unsigned arithmetic happens.  In fact, by doing this change,
   Martin introduced a subtle but fatal error that caused the operation of
   sending large mail messages to the SMTP server under Windows to fail.
   By putting all values back to be signed, avoiding any signed/unsigned
   mixing, the bug immediately went away.  The type then in use was
   Lstream_Data_Count, so that it be reverted cleanly if a vote came to
   that.  Now it is Bytecount.

   Some earlier comments about why the type must be signed: This MUST BE
   SIGNED, since it also is used in functions that return the number of
   bytes actually read to or written from in an operation, and these
   functions can return -1 to signal error.

   Note that the standard Unix @code{read()} and @code{write()} functions define the
   count going in as a size_t, which is UNSIGNED, and the count going
   out as an ssize_t, which is SIGNED.  This is a horrible design
   flaw.  Not only is it highly likely to lead to logic errors when a
   -1 gets interpreted as a large positive number, but operations are
   bound to fail in all sorts of horrible ways when a number in the
   upper-half of the size_t range is passed in -- this number is
   unrepresentable as an ssize_t, so code that checks to see how many
   bytes are actually written (which is mandatory if you are dealing
   with certain types of devices) will get completely screwed up.

   --ben
*/

typedef enum lstream_buffering
--------------------------------- snip -------------------------------------
@end example

@item
in @file{dumper.c}, there are four places, all inside of @code{switch()} statements,
where XD_BYTECOUNT appears twice as a case tag.  In each case, the two
case blocks contain identical code, and you should *REMOVE THE SECOND*
and leave the first.
@end enumerate

@node Text/Char Type Renaming,  , Great Integral Type Renaming, Major Textual Changes
@subsection Text/Char Type Renaming
@cindex Text/Char Type Renaming
@cindex type renaming, text/char
@cindex renaming, text/char types

The purpose of this was

@enumerate
@item
To distinguish between ``charptr'' when it refers to operations on
the pointer itself and when it refers to operations on text
@item
To use consistent naming for everything referring to internal format, i.e.
@end enumerate

@example
	Itext == text in internal format
	Ibyte == a byte in such text
	Ichar == a char as represented in internal character format
@end example

Thus e.g.

@example
	set_charptr_emchar -> set_itext_ichar
@end example
 
This was done using a script like this: 

@example
files="*.[ch] s/*.h m/*.h config.h.in ../configure.in Makefile.in.in ../lib-src/*.[ch] ../lwlib/*.[ch]"
gr Intbyte Ibyte $files
gr INTBYTE IBYTE $files
gr intbyte ibyte $files
gr EMCHAR ICHAR $files
gr emchar ichar $files
gr Emchar Ichar $files
gr INC_CHARPTR INC_IBYTEPTR $files
gr DEC_CHARPTR DEC_IBYTEPTR $files
gr VALIDATE_CHARPTR VALIDATE_IBYTEPTR $files
gr valid_charptr valid_ibyteptr $files
gr CHARPTR ITEXT $files
gr charptr itext $files
gr Charptr Itext $files
@end example

See above for the source to @samp{gr}.

As in the integral-types change, there are pre and post tags before and
after the change:

@example
	pre-internal-format-textual-renaming
	post-internal-format-textual-renaming
@end example

When merging a large branch, follow the same sort of procedure
documented above, using these tags -- essentially sync up to the pre
tag, then apply the script yourself, then sync from the post tag to the
present.  You can probably do the same if you don't have a separate
workspace, but do have lots of outstanding changes and you'd rather not
just merge all the textual changes directly.  Use something like this:

(WARNING: I'm not a CVS guru; before trying this, or any large operation
that might potentially mess things up, @strong{DEFINITELY} make a backup of
your existing workspace.)

@example
cup -r pre-internal-format-textual-renaming
<apply script>
cup -A -j post-internal-format-textual-renaming -j HEAD
@end example

This might also work:

@example
cup -j pre-internal-format-textual-renaming
<apply script>
cup -j post-internal-format-textual-renaming -j HEAD
@end example

ben

The following is a script to go in the opposite direction:

@example
files="*.[ch] s/*.h m/*.h config.h.in ../configure.in Makefile.in.in ../lib-src/*.[ch] ../lwlib/*.[ch]"

# Evidently Perl considers _ to be a word char ala \b, even though XEmacs
# doesn't.  We need to be careful here with ibyte/ichar because of words
# like Richard, @code{eicharlen()}, multibyte, HIBYTE, etc.

gr Ibyte Intbyte $files
gr '\bIBYTE' INTBYTE $files
gr '\bibyte' intbyte $files
gr '\bICHAR' EMCHAR $files
gr '\bichar' emchar $files
gr '\bIchar' Emchar $files
gr '\bIBYTEPTR' CHARPTR $files
gr '\bibyteptr' charptr $files
gr '\bITEXT' CHARPTR $files
gr '\bitext' charptr $files
gr '\bItext' CHARPTR $files

gr '_IBYTE' _INTBYTE $files
gr '_ibyte' _intbyte $files
gr '_ICHAR' _EMCHAR $files
gr '_ichar' _emchar $files
gr '_Ichar' _Emchar $files
gr '_IBYTEPTR' _CHARPTR $files
gr '_ibyteptr' _charptr $files
gr '_ITEXT' _CHARPTR $files
gr '_itext' _charptr $files
gr '_Itext' _CHARPTR $files
@end example

@node Debugging and Testing,  , Major Textual Changes, Rules When Writing New C Code
@section Debugging and Testing
@cindex debugging and testing

@cindex Purify
@cindex Quantify
To make a purified XEmacs, do: @code{make puremacs}.
To make a quantified XEmacs, do: @code{make quantmacs}.

You simply can't dump Quantified and Purified images (unless using the
portable dumper).  Purify gets confused when xemacs frees memory in one
process that was allocated in a @emph{different} process on a different
machine!  Run it like so:
@example
temacs -batch -l loadup.el run-temacs @var{xemacs-args...}
@end example

@cindex error checking
Before you go through the trouble, are you compiling with all
debugging and error-checking off?  If not, try that first.  Be warned
that while Quantify is directly responsible for quite a few
optimizations which have been made to XEmacs, doing a run which
generates results which can be acted upon is not necessarily a trivial
task.

Also, if you're still willing to do some runs make sure you configure
with the @samp{--quantify} flag.  That will keep Quantify from starting
to record data until after the loadup is completed and will shut off
recording right before it shuts down (which generates enough bogus data
to throw most results off).  It also enables three additional elisp
commands: @code{quantify-start-recording-data},
@code{quantify-stop-recording-data} and @code{quantify-clear-data}.

If you want to make XEmacs faster, target your favorite slow benchmark,
run a profiler like Quantify, @code{gprof}, or @code{tcov}, and figure
out where the cycles are going.  In many cases you can localize the
problem (because a particular new feature or even a single patch
elicited it).  Don't hesitate to use brute force techniques like a
global counter incremented at strategic places, especially in
combination with other performance indications (@emph{e.g.}, degree of
buffer fragmentation into extents).

Specific projects:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Make the garbage collector faster.  Figure out how to write an
incremental garbage collector.
@item
Write a compiler that takes bytecode and spits out C code.
Unfortunately, you will then need a C compiler and a more fully
developed module system.
@item
Speed up redisplay.
@item
Speed up syntax highlighting.  It was suggested that ``maybe moving some
of the syntax highlighting capabilities into C would make a
difference.''  Wrong idea, I think.  When processing one 400kB file a
particular low-level routine was being called 40 @emph{million} times
simply for @emph{one} call to @code{newline-and-indent}.  Syntax
highlighting needs to be rewritten to use a reliable, fast parser, then
to trust the pre-parsed structure, and only do re-highlighting locally
to a text change.  Modern machines are fast enough to implement such
parsers in Lisp; but no machine will ever be fast enough to deal with
quadratic (or worse) algorithms!
@item
Implement tail recursion in Emacs Lisp (hard!).
@end itemize

Unfortunately, Emacs Lisp is slow, and is going to stay slow.  Function
calls in elisp are especially expensive.  Iterating over a long list is
going to be 30 times faster implemented in C than in Elisp.

To get started debugging XEmacs, take a look at the @file{.gdbinit} and
@file{.dbxrc} files in the @file{src} directory.  See the section in the
XEmacs FAQ on How to Debug an XEmacs problem with a debugger.

After making source code changes, run @code{make check} to ensure that
you haven't introduced any regressions.  If you want to make xemacs more
reliable, please improve the test suite in @file{tests/automated}.

Did you make sure you didn't introduce any new compiler warnings?

Before submitting a patch, please try compiling at least once with

@example
configure --with-mule --use-union-type --error-checking=all
@end example

@node Regression Testing XEmacs, CVS Techniques, Rules When Writing New C Code, Top
@chapter Regression Testing XEmacs
@cindex testing, regression

@menu
* How to Regression-Test::      
* Modules for Regression Testing::  
@end menu

@node How to Regression-Test, Modules for Regression Testing, Regression Testing XEmacs, Regression Testing XEmacs
@section How to Regression-Test
@cindex how to regression-test
@cindex regression-test, how to
@cindex testing, regression, how to

The source directory @file{tests/automated} contains XEmacs' automated
test suite.  The usual way of running all the tests is running
@code{make check} from the top-level build directory.

The test suite is unfinished and it's still lacking some essential
features.  It is nevertheless recommended that you run the tests to
confirm that XEmacs behaves correctly.

If you want to run a specific test case, you can do it from the
command-line like this:

@example
$ xemacs -batch -l test-harness.elc -f batch-test-emacs TEST-FILE
@end example

If a test fails and you need more information, you can run the test
suite interactively by loading @file{test-harness.el} into a running
XEmacs and typing @kbd{M-x test-emacs-test-file RET <filename> RET}.
You will see a log of passed and failed tests, which should allow you to
investigate the source of the error and ultimately fix the bug.  If you
are not capable of, or don't have time for, debugging it yourself,
please do report the failures using @kbd{M-x report-emacs-bug} or
@kbd{M-x build-report}.

@deffn Command test-emacs-test-file file
Runs the tests in @var{file}.  @file{test-harness.el} must be loaded.
Defines all the macros described in this node, and undefines them when
done.
@end deffn

Adding a new test file is trivial: just create a new file here and it
will be run.  There is no need to byte-compile any of the files in
this directory---the test-harness will take care of any necessary
byte-compilation.

Look at the existing test cases for the examples of coding test cases.
It all boils down to your imagination and judicious use of the macros
@code{Assert}, @code{Check-Error}, @code{Check-Error-Message}, and
@code{Check-Message}.  Note that all of these macros are defined only
for the duration of the test: they do not exist in the global
environment.

@deffn Macro Assert expr
Check that @var{expr} is non-nil at this point in the test.
@end deffn

@deffn Macro Check-Error expected-error body
Check that execution of @var{body} causes @var{expected-error} to be
signaled.  @var{body} is a @code{progn}-like body, and may contain
several expressions.  @var{expected-error} is a symbol defined as
an error by @code{define-error}.
@end deffn

@deffn Macro Check-Error-Message expected-error expected-error-regexp body
Check that execution of @var{body} causes @var{expected-error} to be
signaled, and generate a message matching @var{expected-error-regexp}.
@var{body} is a @code{progn}-like body, and may contain several
expressions.  @var{expected-error} is a symbol defined as an error
by @code{define-error}.
@end deffn

@deffn Macro Check-Message expected-message body
Check that execution of @var{body} causes @var{expected-message} to be
generated (using @code{message} or a similar function).  @var{body} is a
@code{progn}-like body, and may contain several expressions.
@end deffn

Here's a simple example checking case-sensitive and case-insensitive
comparisons from @file{case-tests.el}.

@example
(with-temp-buffer
  (insert "Test Buffer")
  (let ((case-fold-search t))
    (goto-char (point-min))
    (Assert (eq (search-forward "test buffer" nil t) 12))
    (goto-char (point-min))
    (Assert (eq (search-forward "Test buffer" nil t) 12))
    (goto-char (point-min))
    (Assert (eq (search-forward "Test Buffer" nil t) 12))

    (setq case-fold-search nil)
    (goto-char (point-min))
    (Assert (not (search-forward "test buffer" nil t)))
    (goto-char (point-min))
    (Assert (not (search-forward "Test buffer" nil t)))
    (goto-char (point-min))
    (Assert (eq (search-forward "Test Buffer" nil t) 12))))
@end example

This example could be saved in a file in @file{tests/automated}, and it
would constitute a complete test, automatically executed when you run
@kbd{make check} after building XEmacs.  More complex tests may require
substantial temporary scaffolding to create the environment that elicits
the bugs, but the top-level @file{Makefile} and @file{test-harness.el}
handle the running and collection of results from the @code{Assert},
@code{Check-Error}, @code{Check-Error-Message}, and @code{Check-Message}
macros.

Don't suppress tests just because they're due to known bugs not yet
fixed---use the @code{Known-Bug-Expect-Failure} wrapper macro to mark
them.

@deffn Macro Known-Bug-Expect-Failure body
Arrange for failing tests in @var{body} to generate messages prefixed
with "KNOWN BUG:" instead of "FAIL:".  @var{body} is a @code{progn}-like
body, and may contain several tests.
@end deffn

A lot of the tests we run push limits; suppress Ebola warning messages
with the @code{Ignore-Ebola} wrapper macro.

@deffn Macro Ignore-Ebola body
Suppress Ebola warning messages while running tests in @var{body}.
@var{body} is a @code{progn}-like body, and may contain several tests.
@end deffn

Both macros are defined temporarily within the test function.  Simple
examples:

@example
;; Apparently Ignore-Ebola is a solution with no problem to address.
;; There are no examples in 21.5, anyway.

;; from regexp-tests.el
(Known-Bug-Expect-Failure
 (Assert (not (string-match "\\b" "")))
 (Assert (not (string-match " \\b" " "))))
@end example

In general, you should avoid using functionality from packages in your
tests, because you can't be sure that everyone will have the required
package.  However, if you've got a test that works, by all means add it.
Simply wrap the test in an appropriate test, add a notice that the test
was skipped, and update the @code{skipped-test-reasons} hashtable.  The
wrapper macro @code{Skip-Test-Unless} is provided to handle common
cases.

@defvar skipped-test-reasons
Hash table counting the number of times a particular reason is given for
skipping tests.  This is only defined within @code{test-emacs-test-file}.
@end defvar

@deffn Macro Skip-Test-Unless prerequisite reason description body
@var{prerequisite} is usually a feature test (@code{featurep},
@code{boundp}, @code{fboundp}).  @var{reason} is a string describing the
prerequisite; it must be unique because it is used as a hash key in a
table of reasons for skipping tests.  @var{description} describes the
tests being skipped, for the test result summary.  @var{body} is a
@code{progn}-like body, and may contain several tests.
@end deffn

@code{Skip-Test-Unless} is defined temporarily within the test function.
Here's an example of usage from @file{syntax-tests.el}:

@example
;; Test forward-comment at buffer boundaries
(with-temp-buffer
  ;; try to use exactly what you need: featurep, boundp, fboundp
  (Skip-Test-Unless (fboundp 'c-mode)
                    "c-mode unavailable"
                    "comment and parse-partial-sexp tests"
    ;; and here's the test code
    (c-mode)
    (insert "// comment\n")
    (forward-comment -2)
    (Assert (eq (point) (point-min)))
    (let ((point (point)))
      (insert "/* comment */")
      (goto-char point)
      (forward-comment 2)
      (Assert (eq (point) (point-max)))
      (parse-partial-sexp point (point-max)))))
@end example

@code{Skip-Test-Unless} is intended for use with features that are normally
present in typical configurations.  For truly optional features, or
tests that apply to one of several alternative implementations (eg, to
GTK widgets, but not Athena, Motif, MS Windows, or Carbon), simply
silently suppress the test if the feature is not available.

Here are a few general hints for writing tests.

@enumerate
@item
Include related successful cases.  Fixes often break something.

@item
Use the Known-Bug-Expect-Failure macro to mark the cases you know
are going to fail.  We want to be able to distinguish between
regressions and other unexpected failures, and cases that have
been (partially) analyzed but not yet repaired.

@item
Mark the bug with the date of report.  An ``Unfixed since yyyy-mm-dd''
gloss for Known-Bug-Expect-Failure is planned to further increase
developer embarrassment (== incentive to fix the bug), but until then at
least put a comment about the date so we can easily see when it was
first reported.

@item
It's a matter of your judgement, but you should often use generic tests
(@emph{e.g.}, @code{eq}) instead of more specific tests (@code{=} for
numbers) even though you know that arguments ``should'' be of correct
type.  That is, if the functions used can return generic objects
(typically @code{nil}), as well as some more specific type that will be
returned on success.  We don't want failures of those assertions
reported as ``other failures'' (a wrong-type-arg signal, rather than a
null return), we want them reported as ``assertion failures.''

One example is a test that tests @code{(= (string-match this that) 0)},
expecting a successful match.  Now suppose @code{string-match} is broken
such that the match fails.  Then it will return @code{nil}, and @code{=}
will signal ``wrong-type-argument, number-char-or-marker-p, nil'',
generating an ``other failure'' in the report.  But this should be
reported as an assertion failure (the test failed in a foreseeable way),
rather than something else (we don't know what happened because XEmacs
is broken in a way that we weren't trying to test!)
@end enumerate

@node Modules for Regression Testing,  , How to Regression-Test, Regression Testing XEmacs
@section Modules for Regression Testing
@cindex modules for regression testing
@cindex regression testing, modules for

@example
@file{test-harness.el}
@file{base64-tests.el}
@file{byte-compiler-tests.el}
@file{case-tests.el}
@file{ccl-tests.el}
@file{c-tests.el}
@file{database-tests.el}
@file{extent-tests.el}
@file{hash-table-tests.el}
@file{lisp-tests.el}
@file{md5-tests.el}
@file{mule-tests.el}
@file{regexp-tests.el}
@file{symbol-tests.el}
@file{syntax-tests.el}
@file{tag-tests.el}
@file{weak-tests.el}
@end example

@file{test-harness.el} defines the macros @code{Assert},
@code{Check-Error}, @code{Check-Error-Message}, and
@code{Check-Message}.  The other files are test files, testing various
XEmacs facilities.  @xref{Regression Testing XEmacs}.

@node CVS Techniques, XEmacs from the Inside, Regression Testing XEmacs, Top
@chapter CVS Techniques
@cindex CVS techniques

@menu
* Merging a Branch into the Trunk::  
@end menu

@node Merging a Branch into the Trunk,  , CVS Techniques, CVS Techniques
@section Merging a Branch into the Trunk
@cindex merging a branch into the trunk

@enumerate
@item
If you haven't already done a merge, you will be merging from the branch
point; otherwise you'll be merging from the last merge point, which
should be marked by a tag, e.g. @samp{last-sync-ben-mule-21-5}.  In the
former case, create the last-sync tag, e.g.

@example
crw rtag -r ben-mule-21-5-bp last-sync-ben-mule-21-5 xemacs
@end example

(You did create a branch point tag when you created the branch, didn't
you?)

@item
Check everything in on your branch.

@item
Tag your branch with a pre-sync tag, e.g.

@example
crw rtag -r ben-mule-21-5 ben-mule-21-5-pre-feb-20-2002-sync xemacs
@end example

Note, you need to use rtag and specify a version with @samp{-r} (use
@samp{-r HEAD} if necessary) so that removed files are handled correctly
in some obscure cases.  See section 4.8 of the CVS manual.

@item
Tag the trunk so you have a stable place to merge up to in case people
are asynchronously committing to the trunk, e.g.

@example
crw rtag -r HEAD main-branch-ben-mule-21-5-syncpoint-feb-20-2002 xemacs
crw rtag -F -r main-branch-ben-mule-21-5-syncpoint-feb-20-2002 next-sync-ben-mule-21-5 xemacs
@end example

Use -F in the second case because the name might already exist, e.g. if
you've already done a merge.  We make two tags because one is a
permanent mark indicating a syncpoint when merging, and the other is a
symbolic tag to make other operations easier.

@item
Make a backup of your source tree (not totally necessary but useful for
reference and peace of mind): Move one level up from the top directory
of your branch and do, e.g.

@example
cp -a mule mule-backup-2-23-02
@end example

@item
Now, we're ready to merge!  Make sure you're in the top directory of
your branch and do, e.g.

@example
cvs update -j last-sync-ben-mule-21-5 -j next-sync-ben-mule-21-5
@end example

@item
Fix all merge conflicts.  Get the sucker to compile and run.

@item
Tag your branch with a post-sync tag, e.g.

@example
crw rtag -r ben-mule-21-5 ben-mule-21-5-post-feb-20-2002-sync xemacs
@end example

@item
Update the last-sync tag, e.g.

@example
crw rtag -F -r next-sync-ben-mule-21-5 last-sync-ben-mule-21-5 xemacs
@end example
@end enumerate


@node XEmacs from the Inside, Basic Types, CVS Techniques, Top
@chapter XEmacs from the Inside
@cindex XEmacs from the inside
@cindex inside, XEmacs from the

Internally, XEmacs is quite complex, and can be very confusing.  To
simplify things, it can be useful to think of XEmacs as containing an
event loop that ``drives'' everything, and a number of other subsystems,
such as a Lisp engine and a redisplay mechanism.  Each of these other
subsystems exists simultaneously in XEmacs, and each has a certain
state.  The flow of control continually passes in and out of these
different subsystems in the course of normal operation of the editor.

It is important to keep in mind that, most of the time, the editor is
``driven'' by the event loop.  Except during initialization and batch
mode, all subsystems are entered directly or indirectly through the
event loop, and ultimately, control exits out of all subsystems back up
to the event loop.  This cycle of entering a subsystem, exiting back out
to the event loop, and starting another iteration of the event loop
occurs once each keystroke, mouse motion, etc.

If you're trying to understand a particular subsystem (other than the
event loop), think of it as a ``daemon'' process or ``servant'' that is
responsible for one particular aspect of a larger system, and
periodically receives commands or environment changes that cause it to
do something.  Ultimately, these commands and environment changes are
always triggered by the event loop.  For example:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The window and frame mechanism is responsible for keeping track of what
windows and frames exist, what buffers are in them, etc.  It is
periodically given commands (usually from the user) to make a change to
the current window/frame state: i.e. create a new frame, delete a
window, etc.

@item
The buffer mechanism is responsible for keeping track of what buffers
exist and what text is in them.  It is periodically given commands
(usually from the user) to insert or delete text, create a buffer, etc.
When it receives a text-change command, it notifies the redisplay
mechanism.

@item
The redisplay mechanism is responsible for making sure that windows and
frames are displayed correctly.  It is periodically told (by the event
loop) to actually ``do its job'', i.e. snoop around and see what the
current state of the environment (mostly of the currently-existing
windows, frames, and buffers) is, and make sure that state matches
what's actually displayed.  It keeps lots and lots of information around
(such as what is actually being displayed currently, and what the
environment was last time it checked) so that it can minimize the work
it has to do.  It is also helped along in that whenever a relevant
change to the environment occurs, the redisplay mechanism is told about
this, so it has a pretty good idea of where it has to look to find
possible changes and doesn't have to look everywhere.

@item
The Lisp engine is responsible for executing the Lisp code in which most
user commands are written.  It is entered through a call to @code{eval}
or @code{funcall}, which occurs as a result of dispatching an event from
the event loop.  The functions it calls issue commands to the buffer
mechanism, the window/frame subsystem, etc.

@item
The Lisp allocation subsystem is responsible for keeping track of Lisp
objects.  It is given commands from the Lisp engine to allocate objects,
garbage collect, etc.
@end itemize

etc.

  The important idea here is that there are a number of independent
subsystems each with its own responsibility and persistent state, just
like different employees in a company, and each subsystem is
periodically given commands from other subsystems.  Commands can flow
from any one subsystem to any other, but there is usually some sort of
hierarchy, with all commands originating from the event subsystem.

  XEmacs is entered in @code{main()}, which is in @file{emacs.c}.  When
this is called the first time (in a properly-invoked @file{temacs}), it
does the following:

@enumerate
@item
It does some very basic environment initializations, such as determining
where it and its directories (e.g. @file{lisp/} and @file{etc/}) reside
and setting up signal handlers.
@item
It initializes the entire Lisp interpreter.
@item
It sets the initial values of many built-in variables (including many
variables that are visible to Lisp programs), such as the global keymap
object and the built-in faces (a face is an object that describes the
display characteristics of text).  This involves creating Lisp objects
and thus is dependent on step (2).
@item
It performs various other initializations that are relevant to the
particular environment it is running in, such as retrieving environment
variables, determining the current date and the user who is running the
program, examining its standard input, creating any necessary file
descriptors, etc.
@item
At this point, the C initialization is complete.  A Lisp program that
was specified on the command line (usually @file{loadup.el}) is called
(temacs is normally invoked as @code{temacs -batch -l loadup.el dump}).
@file{loadup.el} loads all of the other Lisp files that are needed for
the operation of the editor, calls the @code{dump-emacs} function to
write out @file{xemacs}, and then kills the temacs process.
@end enumerate

  When @file{xemacs} is then run, it only redoes steps (1) and (4)
above; all variables already contain the values they were set to when
the executable was dumped, and all memory that was allocated with
@code{malloc()} is still around. (XEmacs knows whether it is being run
as @file{xemacs} or @file{temacs} because it sets the global variable
@code{initialized} to 1 after step (4) above.) At this point,
@file{xemacs} calls a Lisp function to do any further initialization,
which includes parsing the command-line (the C code can only do limited
command-line parsing, which includes looking for the @samp{-batch} and
@samp{-l} flags and a few other flags that it needs to know about before
initialization is complete), creating the first frame (or @dfn{window}
in standard window-system parlance), running the user's init file
(usually the file @file{.emacs} in the user's home directory), etc.  The
function to do this is usually called @code{normal-top-level};
@file{loadup.el} tells the C code about this function by setting its
name as the value of the Lisp variable @code{top-level}.

  When the Lisp initialization code is done, the C code enters the event
loop, and stays there for the duration of the XEmacs process.  The code
for the event loop is contained in @file{cmdloop.c}, and is called
@code{Fcommand_loop_1()}.  Note that this event loop could very well be
written in Lisp, and in fact a Lisp version exists; but apparently,
doing this makes XEmacs run noticeably slower.

  Notice how much of the initialization is done in Lisp, not in C.
In general, XEmacs tries to move as much code as is possible into
Lisp.  Code that remains in C is code that implements the Lisp
interpreter itself, or code that needs to be very fast, or code that
needs to do system calls or other such stuff that needs to be done in
C, or code that needs to have access to ``forbidden'' structures. (One
conscious aspect of the design of Lisp under XEmacs is a clean
separation between the external interface to a Lisp object's
functionality and its internal implementation.  Part of this design is
that Lisp programs are forbidden from accessing the contents of the
object other than through using a standard API.  In this respect,
XEmacs Lisp is similar to modern Lisp dialects but differs from GNU
Emacs, which tends to expose the implementation and allow Lisp
programs to look at it directly.  The major advantage of hiding the
implementation is that it allows the implementation to be redesigned
without affecting any Lisp programs, including those that might want
to be ``clever'' by looking directly at the object's contents and
possibly manipulating them.)

  Moving code into Lisp makes the code easier to debug and maintain and
makes it much easier for people who are not XEmacs developers to
customize XEmacs, because they can make a change with much less chance
of obscure and unwanted interactions occurring than if they were to
change the C code.

@node Basic Types, Low-Level Allocation, XEmacs from the Inside, Top
@chapter Basic Types
@cindex basic types
@cindex types, basic

Not yet documented.

@node Low-Level Allocation, The XEmacs Object System (Abstractly Speaking), Basic Types, Top
@chapter Low-Level Allocation
@cindex low-level allocation
@cindex allocation, low-level

@menu
* Basic Heap Allocation::       
* Stack Allocation::            
* Dynamic Arrays::              
* Allocation by Blocks::        
* Modules for Allocation::      
@end menu

@node Basic Heap Allocation, Stack Allocation, Low-Level Allocation, Low-Level Allocation
@section Basic Heap Allocation
@cindex basic heap allocation

@node Stack Allocation, Dynamic Arrays, Basic Heap Allocation, Low-Level Allocation
@section Stack Allocation
@cindex stack allocation

@node Dynamic Arrays, Allocation by Blocks, Stack Allocation, Low-Level Allocation
@section Dynamic Arrays
@cindex dynamic arrays

@cindex dynamic array
The @code{Dynarr} type implements a @dfn{dynamic array}, which is
similar to a standard C array but has no fixed limit on the number of
elements it can contain.  Dynamic arrays can hold elements of any type,
and when you add a new element, the array automatically resizes itself
if it isn't big enough.  Dynarrs are extensively used in the redisplay
mechanism.


A "dynamic array" is a contiguous array of fixed-size elements where there
is no upper limit (except available memory) on the number of elements in the
array.  Because the elements are maintained contiguously, space is used
efficiently (no per-element pointers necessary) and random access to a
particular element is in constant time.  At any one point, the block of memory
that holds the array has an upper limit; if this limit is exceeded, the
memory is realloc()ed into a new array that is twice as big.  Assuming that
the time to grow the array is on the order of the new size of the array
block, this scheme has a provably constant amortized time (i.e. average
time over all additions).

When you add elements or retrieve elements, pointers are used.  Note that
the element itself (of whatever size it is), and not the pointer to it,
is stored in the array; thus you do not have to allocate any heap memory
on your own.  Also, returned pointers are only guaranteed to be valid
until the next operation that changes the length of the array.

This is a container object.  Declare a dynamic array of a specific type
as follows:

  typedef struct
  @{
    Dynarr_declare (mytype);
  @} mytype_dynarr;

Use the following functions/macros:

@example
void *Dynarr_new(type)
   [MACRO] Create a new dynamic-array object, with each element of the
   specified type.  The return value is cast to (type##_dynarr).
   This requires following the convention that types are declared in
   such a way that this type concatenation works.  In particular, TYPE
   must be a symbol, not an arbitrary C type.

Dynarr_add(d, el)
   [MACRO] Add an element to the end of a dynamic array.  EL is a pointer
   to the element; the element itself is stored in the array, however.
   No function call is performed unless the array needs to be resized.

Dynarr_add_many(d, base, len)
   [MACRO] Add LEN elements to the end of the dynamic array.  The elements
   should be contiguous in memory, starting at BASE.  If BASE if NULL,
   just make space for the elements; don't actually add them.

Dynarr_insert_many_at_start(d, base, len)
   [MACRO] Append LEN elements to the beginning of the dynamic array.
   The elements should be contiguous in memory, starting at BASE.
   If BASE if NULL, just make space for the elements; don't actually
   add them.

Dynarr_insert_many(d, base, len, start)
   Insert LEN elements to the dynamic array starting at position
   START.  The elements should be contiguous in memory, starting at BASE.
   If BASE if NULL, just make space for the elements; don't actually
   add them.

Dynarr_delete(d, i)
   [MACRO] Delete an element from the dynamic array at position I.

Dynarr_delete_many(d, start, len)
   Delete LEN elements from the dynamic array starting at position
   START.

Dynarr_delete_by_pointer(d, p)
   [MACRO] Delete an element from the dynamic array at pointer P,
   which must point within the block of memory that stores the data.
   P should be obtained using Dynarr_atp().

int Dynarr_length(d)
   [MACRO] Return the number of elements currently in a dynamic array.

int Dynarr_largest(d)
   [MACRO] Return the maximum value that Dynarr_length(d) would
   ever have returned.

type Dynarr_at(d, i)
   [MACRO] Return the element at the specified index (no bounds checking
   done on the index).  The element itself is returned, not a pointer
   to it.

type *Dynarr_atp(d, i)
   [MACRO] Return a pointer to the element at the specified index (no
   bounds checking done on the index).  The pointer may not be valid
   after an element is added to or removed from the array.

Dynarr_reset(d)
   [MACRO] Reset the length of a dynamic array to 0.

Dynarr_free(d)
   Destroy a dynamic array and the memory allocated to it.
@end example

Use the following global variable:

@example
   Dynarr_min_size
      Minimum allowable size for a dynamic array when it is resized.
@end example

@node Allocation by Blocks, Modules for Allocation, Dynamic Arrays, Low-Level Allocation
@section Allocation by Blocks
@cindex allocation by blocks

  The @code{Blocktype} type efficiently manages the
allocation of fixed-size blocks by minimizing the number of times that
@code{malloc()} and @code{free()} are called.  It allocates memory in
large chunks, subdivides the chunks into blocks of the proper size, and
returns the blocks as requested.  When blocks are freed, they are placed
onto a linked list, so they can be efficiently reused.  This data type
is not much used in XEmacs currently, because it's a fairly new
addition.


A "block-type object" is used to efficiently allocate and free blocks
of a particular size.  Freed blocks are remembered in a free list and
are reused as necessary to allocate new blocks, so as to avoid as
much as possible making calls to malloc() and free().

This is a container object.  Declare a block-type object of a specific type
as follows:

struct mytype_blocktype @{
  Blocktype_declare (mytype);
@};

Use the following functions/macros:

@example
structype *Blocktype_new(structype)
   [MACRO] Create a new block-type object of the specified type.
   The argument to this call should be the type of object to be
   created, e.g. foobar_blocktype.
type *Blocktype_alloc(b)
   [MACRO] Allocate a block of the proper type for the specified
   block-type object and return a pointer to it.
Blocktype_free(b, block)
   Free a block of the type corresponding to the specified block-type
   object.
Blocktype_delete(b)
   Destroy a block-type object and the memory allocated to it.
@end example


@node Modules for Allocation,  , Allocation by Blocks, Low-Level Allocation
@section Modules for Allocation
@cindex modules for allocation

@example
@file{alloca.c}
@file{free-hook.c}
@file{getpagesize.h}
@file{gmalloc.c}
@file{malloc.c}
@file{mem-limits.h}
@file{ralloc.c}
@file{vm-limit.c}
@end example

These handle basic C allocation of memory.  @file{alloca.c} is an emulation of
the stack allocation function @code{alloca()} on machines that lack
this. (XEmacs makes extensive use of @code{alloca()} in its code.)

@file{gmalloc.c} and @file{malloc.c} are two implementations of the standard C
functions @code{malloc()}, @code{realloc()} and @code{free()}.  They are
often used in place of the standard system-provided @code{malloc()}
because they usually provide a much faster implementation, at the
expense of additional memory use.  @file{gmalloc.c} is a newer implementation
that is much more memory-efficient for large allocations than @file{malloc.c},
and should always be preferred if it works. (At one point, @file{gmalloc.c}
didn't work on some systems where @file{malloc.c} worked; but this should be
fixed now.)

@cindex relocating allocator
@file{ralloc.c} is the @dfn{relocating allocator}.  It provides
functions similar to @code{malloc()}, @code{realloc()} and @code{free()}
that allocate memory that can be dynamically relocated in memory.  The
advantage of this is that allocated memory can be shuffled around to
place all the free memory at the end of the heap, and the heap can then
be shrunk, releasing the memory back to the operating system.  The use
of this can be controlled with the configure option @code{--rel-alloc};
if enabled, memory allocated for buffers will be relocatable, so that if
a very large file is visited and the buffer is later killed, the memory
can be released to the operating system.  (The disadvantage of this
mechanism is that it can be very slow.  On systems with the
@code{mmap()} system call, the XEmacs version of @file{ralloc.c} uses
this to move memory around without actually having to block-copy it,
which can speed things up; but it can still cause noticeable performance
degradation.)

On Linux systems using @samp{glibc 2}, these strategies are built in to
the so-called ``Doug Lea malloc.''  See, for example, Doug Lea's home
page, especially @uref{http://gee.cs.oswego.edu/dl/html/malloc.html,``A
Memory Allocator''}.  The source file, @file{malloc.c} (available at the
same place) is copiously (and usefully!) commented.
@uref{http://www.malloc.de/,Wolfram Gloger's home page} may also be
useful.

@file{free-hook.c} contains some debugging functions for checking for invalid
arguments to @code{free()}.

@file{vm-limit.c} contains some functions that warn the user when memory is
getting low.  These are callback functions that are called by @file{gmalloc.c}
and @file{malloc.c} at appropriate times.

@file{getpagesize.h} provides a uniform interface for retrieving the size of a
page in virtual memory.  @file{mem-limits.h} provides a uniform interface for
retrieving the total amount of available virtual memory.  Both are
similar in spirit to the @file{sys*.h} files described in section J, below.


@example
@file{blocktype.c}
@file{blocktype.h}
@file{dynarr.c}
@end example

These implement a couple of basic C data types to facilitate memory
allocation.

@node The XEmacs Object System (Abstractly Speaking), How Lisp Objects Are Represented in C, Low-Level Allocation, Top
@chapter The XEmacs Object System (Abstractly Speaking)
@cindex XEmacs object system (abstractly speaking), the
@cindex object system (abstractly speaking), the XEmacs

  At the heart of the Lisp interpreter is its management of objects.
XEmacs Lisp contains many built-in objects, some of which are
simple and others of which can be very complex; and some of which
are very common, and others of which are rarely used or are only
used internally. (Since the Lisp allocation system, with its
automatic reclamation of unused storage, is so much more convenient
than @code{malloc()} and @code{free()}, the C code makes extensive use of it
in its internal operations.)

  The basic Lisp objects are

@table @code
@item integer
31 bits of precision, or 63 bits on 64-bit machines; the
reason for this is described below when the internal Lisp object
representation is described.
@item char
An object representing a single character of text; chars behave like
integers in many ways but are logically considered text rather than
numbers and have a different read syntax. (the read syntax for a char
contains the char itself or some textual encoding of it---for example,
a Japanese Kanji character might be encoded as @samp{^[$(B#&^[(B} using the
ISO-2022 encoding standard---rather than the numerical representation
of the char; this way, if the mapping between chars and integers
changes, which is quite possible for Kanji characters and other extended
characters, the same character will still be created.  Note that some
primitives confuse chars and integers.  The worst culprit is @code{eq},
which makes a special exception and considers a char to be @code{eq} to
its integer equivalent, even though in no other case are objects of two
different types @code{eq}.  The reason for this monstrosity is
compatibility with existing code; the separation of char from integer
came fairly recently.)
@item float
Same precision as a double in C.
@item bignum
@itemx ratio
@itemx bigfloat
As build-time options, arbitrary-precision numbers are available.
Bignums are integers, and when available they remove the restriction on
buffer size.  Ratios are non-integral rational numbers.  Bigfloats are
arbitrary-precision floating point numbers, with precision specified at
runtime.
@item symbol
An object that contains Lisp objects and is referred to by name;
symbols are used to implement variables and named functions
and to provide the equivalent of preprocessor constants in C.
@item string
Self-explanatory; behaves much like a vector of chars
but has a different read syntax and is stored and manipulated
more compactly.
@item bit-vector
A vector of bits; similar to a string in spirit.
@item vector
A one-dimensional array of Lisp objects providing constant-time access
to any of the objects; access to an arbitrary object in a vector is
faster than for lists, but the operations that can be done on a vector
are more limited.
@item compiled-function
An object containing compiled Lisp code, known as @dfn{byte code}.
@item subr
A Lisp primitive, i.e. a Lisp-callable function implemented in C.
@item cons
A simple container for two Lisp objects, used to implement lists and
most other data structures in Lisp.
@end table

Objects which are not conses are called atoms.

@cindex closure
Note that there is no basic ``function'' type, as in more powerful
versions of Lisp (where it's called a @dfn{closure}).  XEmacs Lisp does
not provide the closure semantics implemented by Common Lisp and Scheme.
The guts of a function in XEmacs Lisp are represented in one of four
ways: a symbol specifying another function (when one function is an
alias for another), a list (whose first element must be the symbol
@code{lambda}) containing the function's source code, a
compiled-function object, or a subr object. (In other words, given a
symbol specifying the name of a function, calling @code{symbol-function}
to retrieve the contents of the symbol's function cell will return one
of these types of objects.)

XEmacs Lisp also contains numerous specialized objects used to implement
the editor:

@table @code
@item buffer
Stores text like a string, but is optimized for insertion and deletion
and has certain other properties that can be set.
@item frame
An object with various properties whose displayable representation is a
@dfn{window} in window-system parlance.
@item window
A section of a frame that displays the contents of a buffer;
often called a @dfn{pane} in window-system parlance.
@item window-configuration
An object that represents a saved configuration of windows in a frame.
@item device
An object representing a screen on which frames can be displayed;
equivalent to a @dfn{display} in the X Window System and a @dfn{TTY} in
character mode.
@item face
An object specifying the appearance of text or graphics; it has
properties such as font, foreground color, and background color.
@item marker
An object that refers to a particular position in a buffer and moves
around as text is inserted and deleted to stay in the same relative
position to the text around it.
@item extent
Similar to a marker but covers a range of text in a buffer; can also
specify properties of the text, such as a face in which the text is to
be displayed, whether the text is invisible or unmodifiable, etc.
@item event
Generated by calling @code{next-event} and contains information
describing a particular event happening in the system, such as the user
pressing a key or a process terminating.
@item keymap
An object that maps from events (described using lists, vectors, and
symbols rather than with an event object because the mapping is for
classes of events, rather than individual events) to functions to
execute or other events to recursively look up; the functions are
described by name, using a symbol, or using lists to specify the
function's code.
@item glyph
An object that describes the appearance of an image (e.g.  pixmap) on
the screen; glyphs can be attached to the beginning or end of extents
and in some future version of XEmacs will be able to be inserted
directly into a buffer.
@item process
An object that describes a connection to an externally-running process.
@end table

  There are some other, less-commonly-encountered general objects:

@table @code
@item hash-table
An object that maps from an arbitrary Lisp object to another arbitrary
Lisp object, using hashing for fast lookup.
@item obarray
A limited form of hash-table that maps from strings to symbols; obarrays
are used to look up a symbol given its name and are not actually their
own object type but are kludgily represented using vectors with hidden
fields (this representation derives from GNU Emacs).
@item specifier
A complex object used to specify the value of a display property; a
default value is given and different values can be specified for
particular frames, buffers, windows, devices, or classes of device.
@item char-table
An object that maps from chars or classes of chars to arbitrary Lisp
objects; internally char tables use a complex nested-vector
representation that is optimized to the way characters are represented
as integers.
@item range-table
An object that maps from ranges of integers to arbitrary Lisp objects.
@end table

  And some strange special-purpose objects:

@table @code
@item charset
@itemx coding-system
Objects used when MULE, or multi-lingual/Asian-language, support is
enabled.
@item color-instance
@itemx font-instance
@itemx image-instance
An object that encapsulates a window-system resource; instances are
mostly used internally but are exposed on the Lisp level for cleanness
of the specifier model and because it's occasionally useful for Lisp
program to create or query the properties of instances.
@item subwindow
An object that encapsulate a @dfn{subwindow} resource, i.e. a
window-system child window that is drawn into by an external process;
this object should be integrated into the glyph system but isn't yet,
and may change form when this is done.
@item tooltalk-message
@itemx tooltalk-pattern
Objects that represent resources used in the ToolTalk interprocess
communication protocol.
@item toolbar-button
An object used in conjunction with the toolbar.
@end table

  And objects that are only used internally:

@table @code
@item opaque
A generic object for encapsulating arbitrary memory; this allows you the
generality of @code{malloc()} and the convenience of the Lisp object
system.
@item lstream
A buffering I/O stream, used to provide a unified interface to anything
that can accept output or provide input, such as a file descriptor, a
stdio stream, a chunk of memory, a Lisp buffer, a Lisp string, etc.;
it's a Lisp object to make its memory management more convenient.
@item char-table-entry
Subsidiary objects in the internal char-table representation.
@item extent-auxiliary
@itemx menubar-data
@itemx toolbar-data
Various special-purpose objects that are basically just used to
encapsulate memory for particular subsystems, similar to the more
general ``opaque'' object.
@item symbol-value-forward
@itemx symbol-value-buffer-local
@itemx symbol-value-varalias
@itemx symbol-value-lisp-magic
Special internal-only objects that are placed in the value cell of a
symbol to indicate that there is something special with this variable --
e.g. it has no value, it mirrors another variable, or it mirrors some C
variable; there is really only one kind of object, called a
@dfn{symbol-value-magic}, but it is sort-of halfway kludged into
semi-different object types.
@end table

@cindex permanent objects
@cindex temporary objects
  Some types of objects are @dfn{permanent}, meaning that once created,
they do not disappear until explicitly destroyed, using a function such
as @code{delete-buffer}, @code{delete-window}, @code{delete-frame}, etc.
Others will disappear once they are not longer used, through the garbage
collection mechanism.  Buffers, frames, windows, devices, and processes
are among the objects that are permanent.  Note that some objects can go
both ways: Faces can be created either way; extents are normally
permanent, but detached extents (extents not referring to any text, as
happens to some extents when the text they are referring to is deleted)
are temporary.  Note that some permanent objects, such as faces and
coding systems, cannot be deleted.  Note also that windows are unique in
that they can be @emph{undeleted} after having previously been
deleted. (This happens as a result of restoring a window configuration.)

@cindex read syntax
  Many types of objects have a @dfn{read syntax}, i.e. a way of
specifying an object of that type in Lisp code.  When you load a Lisp
file, or type in code to be evaluated, what really happens is that the
function @code{read} is called, which reads some text and creates an object
based on the syntax of that text; then @code{eval} is called, which
possibly does something special; then this loop repeats until there's
no more text to read. (@code{eval} only actually does something special
with symbols, which causes the symbol's value to be returned,
similar to referencing a variable; and with conses [i.e. lists],
which cause a function invocation.  All other values are returned
unchanged.)

  The read syntax

@example
17297
@end example

converts to an integer whose value is 17297.

@example
355/113
@end example

converts to a ratio commonly used to approximate @emph{pi} when ratios
are configured, and otherwise to a symbol whose name is ``355/113'' (for
backward compatibility).

@example
1.983e-4
@end example

converts to a float whose value is 1.983e-4, or .0001983.

@example
?b
@end example

converts to a char that represents the lowercase letter b.

@example
?^[$(B#&^[(B
@end example

(where @samp{^[} actually is an @samp{ESC} character) converts to a
particular Kanji character when using an ISO2022-based coding system for
input. (To decode this goo: @samp{ESC} begins an escape sequence;
@samp{ESC $ (} is a class of escape sequences meaning ``switch to a
94x94 character set''; @samp{ESC $ ( B} means ``switch to Japanese
Kanji''; @samp{#} and @samp{&} collectively index into a 94-by-94 array
of characters [subtract 33 from the ASCII value of each character to get
the corresponding index]; @samp{ESC (} is a class of escape sequences
meaning ``switch to a 94 character set''; @samp{ESC (B} means ``switch
to US ASCII''.  It is a coincidence that the letter @samp{B} is used to
denote both Japanese Kanji and US ASCII.  If the first @samp{B} were
replaced with an @samp{A}, you'd be requesting a Chinese Hanzi character
from the GB2312 character set.)

@example
"foobar"
@end example

converts to a string.

@example
foobar
@end example

converts to a symbol whose name is @code{"foobar"}.  This is done by
looking up the string equivalent in the global variable
@code{obarray}, whose contents should be an obarray.  If no symbol
is found, a new symbol with the name @code{"foobar"} is automatically
created and added to @code{obarray}; this process is called
@dfn{interning} the symbol.
@cindex interning

@example
(foo . bar)
@end example

converts to a cons cell containing the symbols @code{foo} and @code{bar}.

@example
(1 a 2.5)
@end example

converts to a three-element list containing the specified objects
(note that a list is actually a set of nested conses; see the
XEmacs Lisp Reference).

@example
[1 a 2.5]
@end example

converts to a three-element vector containing the specified objects.

@example
#[... ... ... ...]
@end example

converts to a compiled-function object (the actual contents are not
shown since they are not relevant here; look at a file that ends with
@file{.elc} for examples).

@example
#*01110110
@end example

converts to a bit-vector.

@example
#s(hash-table ... ...)
@end example

converts to a hash table (the actual contents are not shown).

@example
#s(range-table ... ...)
@end example

converts to a range table (the actual contents are not shown).

@example
#s(char-table ... ...)
@end example

converts to a char table (the actual contents are not shown).

Note that the @code{#s()} syntax is the general syntax for structures,
which are not really implemented in XEmacs Lisp but should be.

When an object is printed out (using @code{print} or a related
function), the read syntax is used, so that the same object can be read
in again.

The other objects do not have read syntaxes, usually because it does not
really make sense to create them in this fashion (i.e.  processes, where
it doesn't make sense to have a subprocess created as a side effect of
reading some Lisp code), or because they can't be created at all
(e.g. subrs).  Permanent objects, as a rule, do not have a read syntax;
nor do most complex objects, which contain too much state to be easily
initialized through a read syntax.

@node How Lisp Objects Are Represented in C, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp, The XEmacs Object System (Abstractly Speaking), Top
@chapter How Lisp Objects Are Represented in C
@cindex Lisp objects are represented in C, how
@cindex objects are represented in C, how Lisp
@cindex represented in C, how Lisp objects are

Lisp objects are represented in C using a 32-bit or 64-bit machine word
(depending on the processor; i.e. DEC Alphas use 64-bit Lisp objects and
most other processors use 32-bit Lisp objects).  The representation
stuffs a pointer together with a tag, as follows:

@example
 [ 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 ]
 [ 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1 0 ]

   <---------------------------------------------------------> <->
            a pointer to a structure, or an integer            tag
@end example

A tag of 00 is used for all pointer object types, a tag of 10 is used
for characters, and the other two tags 01 and 11 are joined together to
form the integer object type.  This representation gives us 31 bit
integers and 30 bit characters, while pointers are represented directly
without any bit masking or shifting.  This representation, though,
assumes that pointers to structs are always aligned to multiples of 4,
so the lower 2 bits are always zero.

Lisp objects use the typedef @code{Lisp_Object}, but the actual C type
used for the Lisp object can vary.  It can be either a simple type
(@code{long} on the DEC Alpha, @code{int} on other machines) or a
structure whose fields are bit fields that line up properly (actually, a
union of structures is used).  Generally the simple integral type is
preferable because it ensures that the compiler will actually use a
machine word to represent the object (some compilers will use more
general and less efficient code for unions and structs even if they can
fit in a machine word).  The union type, however, has the advantage of
stricter type checking.  If you accidentally pass an integer where a Lisp
object is desired, you get a compile error.  The choice of which type
to use is determined by the preprocessor constant @code{USE_UNION_TYPE}
which is defined via the @code{--use-union-type} option to
@code{configure}.

Various macros are used to convert between Lisp_Objects and the
corresponding C type.  Macros of the form @code{XINT()}, @code{XCHAR()},
@code{XSTRING()}, @code{XSYMBOL()}, do any required bit shifting and/or
masking and cast it to the appropriate type.  @code{XINT()} needs to be
a bit tricky so that negative numbers are properly sign-extended.  Since
integers are stored left-shifted, if the right-shift operator does an
arithmetic shift (i.e. it leaves the most-significant bit as-is rather
than shifting in a zero, so that it mimics a divide-by-two even for
negative numbers) the shift to remove the tag bit is enough.  This is
the case on all the systems we support.

Note that when @code{ERROR_CHECK_TYPECHECK} is defined, the converter
macros become more complicated---they check the tag bits and/or the
type field in the first four bytes of a record type to ensure that the
object is really of the correct type.  This is great for catching places
where an incorrect type is being dereferenced---this typically results
in a pointer being dereferenced as the wrong type of structure, with
unpredictable (and sometimes not easily traceable) results.

There are similar @code{XSET@var{TYPE}()} macros that construct a Lisp
object.  These macros are of the form @code{XSET@var{TYPE}
(@var{lvalue}, @var{result})}, i.e. they have to be a statement rather
than just used in an expression.  The reason for this is that standard C
doesn't let you ``construct'' a structure (but GCC does).  Granted, this
sometimes isn't too convenient; for the case of integers, at least, you
can use the function @code{make_int()}, which constructs and
@emph{returns} an integer Lisp object.  Note that the
@code{XSET@var{TYPE}()} macros are also affected by
@code{ERROR_CHECK_TYPECHECK} and make sure that the structure is of the
right type in the case of record types, where the type is contained in
the structure.

The C programmer is responsible for @strong{guaranteeing} that a
Lisp_Object is the correct type before using the @code{X@var{TYPE}}
macros.  This is especially important in the case of lists.  Use
@code{XCAR} and @code{XCDR} if a Lisp_Object is certainly a cons cell,
else use @code{Fcar()} and @code{Fcdr()}.  Trust other C code, but not
Lisp code.  On the other hand, if XEmacs has an internal logic error,
it's better to crash immediately, so sprinkle @code{assert()}s and
``unreachable'' @code{abort()}s liberally about the source code.  Where
performance is an issue, use @code{type_checking_assert},
@code{bufpos_checking_assert}, and @code{gc_checking_assert}, which do
nothing unless the corresponding configure error checking flag was
specified.

Note that in some cases @samp{assert}s will expand to nothing in a
context where that produces an empty statement.  Some compilers will
warn about this.

@node Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp, The Lisp Reader and Compiler, How Lisp Objects Are Represented in C, Top
@chapter Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@cindex allocation of objects in XEmacs Lisp
@cindex objects in XEmacs Lisp, allocation of
@cindex Lisp objects, allocation of in XEmacs

@menu
* Introduction to Allocation::  
* Garbage Collection::          
* GCPROing::                    
* Garbage Collection - Step by Step::  
* Integers and Characters::     
* Allocation from Frob Blocks::  
* lrecords::                    
* Low-level allocation::        
* Cons::                        
* Vector::                      
* Bit Vector::                  
* Symbol::                      
* Marker::                      
* String::                      
* Compiled Function::           
@end menu

@node Introduction to Allocation, Garbage Collection, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@section Introduction to Allocation
@cindex allocation, introduction to

  Emacs Lisp, like all Lisps, has garbage collection.  This means that
the programmer never has to explicitly free (destroy) an object; it
happens automatically when the object becomes inaccessible.  Most
experts agree that garbage collection is a necessity in a modern,
high-level language.  Its omission from C stems from the fact that C was
originally designed to be a nice abstract layer on top of assembly
language, for writing kernels and basic system utilities rather than
large applications.

  Lisp objects can be created by any of a number of Lisp primitives.
Most object types have one or a small number of basic primitives
for creating objects.  For conses, the basic primitive is @code{cons};
for vectors, the primitives are @code{make-vector} and @code{vector}; for
symbols, the primitives are @code{make-symbol} and @code{intern}; etc.
Some Lisp objects, especially those that are primarily used internally,
have no corresponding Lisp primitives.  Every Lisp object, though,
has at least one C primitive for creating it.

  Recall from section (VII) that a Lisp object, as stored in a 32-bit or
64-bit word, has a few tag bits, and a ``value'' that occupies the
remainder of the bits.  We can separate the different Lisp object types
into three broad categories:

@itemize @bullet
@item
(a) Those for whom the value directly represents the contents of the
Lisp object.  Only two types are in this category: integers and
characters.  No special allocation or garbage collection is necessary
for such objects.  Lisp objects of these types do not need to be
@code{GCPRO}ed.
@end itemize

  In the remaining two categories, the type is stored in the object
itself.  The tag for all such objects is the generic @dfn{lrecord}
(Lisp_Type_Record) tag.  The first bytes of the object's structure are an
integer (actually a char) characterising the object's type and some
flags, in particular the mark bit used for garbage collection.  A
structure describing the type is accessible thru the
lrecord_implementation_table indexed with said integer.  This structure
includes the method pointers and a pointer to a string naming the type.

@itemize @bullet
@item
(b) Those lrecords that are allocated in frob blocks (see above).  This
includes the objects that are most common and relatively small, and
includes conses, strings, subrs, floats, compiled functions, symbols,
extents, events, and markers.  With the cleanup of frob blocks done in
19.12, it's not terribly hard to add more objects to this category, but
it's a bit trickier than adding an object type to type (c) (esp. if the
object needs a finalization method), and is not likely to save much
space unless the object is small and there are many of them. (In fact,
if there are very few of them, it might actually waste space.)
@item
(c) Those lrecords that are individually @code{malloc()}ed.  These are
called @dfn{lcrecords}.  All other types are in this category.  Adding a
new type to this category is comparatively easy, and all types added
since 19.8 (when the current allocation scheme was devised, by Richard
Mlynarik), with the exception of the character type, have been in this
category.
@end itemize

  Note that bit vectors are a bit of a special case.  They are
simple lrecords as in category (b), but are individually @code{malloc()}ed
like vectors.  You can basically view them as exactly like vectors
except that their type is stored in lrecord fashion rather than
in directly-tagged fashion.


@node Garbage Collection, GCPROing, Introduction to Allocation, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@section Garbage Collection
@cindex garbage collection

@cindex mark and sweep
  Garbage collection is simple in theory but tricky to implement.
Emacs Lisp uses the oldest garbage collection method, called
@dfn{mark and sweep}.  Garbage collection begins by starting with    
all accessible locations (i.e. all variables and other slots where
Lisp objects might occur) and recursively traversing all objects
accessible from those slots, marking each one that is found.
We then go through all of memory and free each object that is
not marked, and unmarking each object that is marked.  Note
that ``all of memory'' means all currently allocated objects.
Traversing all these objects means traversing all frob blocks,
all vectors (which are chained in one big list), and all
lcrecords (which are likewise chained).

  Garbage collection can be invoked explicitly by calling
@code{garbage-collect} but is also called automatically by @code{eval},
once a certain amount of memory has been allocated since the last
garbage collection (according to @code{gc-cons-threshold}).


@node GCPROing, Garbage Collection - Step by Step, Garbage Collection, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@section @code{GCPRO}ing
@cindex @code{GCPRO}ing
@cindex garbage collection protection
@cindex protection, garbage collection

@code{GCPRO}ing is one of the ugliest and trickiest parts of Emacs
internals.  The basic idea is that whenever garbage collection
occurs, all in-use objects must be reachable somehow or
other from one of the roots of accessibility.  The roots
of accessibility are:

@enumerate
@item
All objects that have been @code{staticpro()}d or
@code{staticpro_nodump()}ed.  This is used for any global C variables
that hold Lisp objects.  A call to @code{staticpro()} happens implicitly
as a result of any symbols declared with @code{defsymbol()} and any
variables declared with @code{DEFVAR_FOO()}.  You need to explicitly
call @code{staticpro()} (in the @code{vars_of_foo()} method of a module)
for other global C variables holding Lisp objects. (This typically
includes internal lists and such things.).  Use
@code{staticpro_nodump()} only in the rare cases when you do not want
the pointed variable to be saved at dump time but rather recompute it at
startup.

Note that @code{obarray} is one of the @code{staticpro()}d things.
Therefore, all functions and variables get marked through this.
@item
Any shadowed bindings that are sitting on the @code{specpdl} stack.
@item
Any objects sitting in currently active (Lisp) stack frames,
catches, and condition cases.
@item
A couple of special-case places where active objects are
located.
@item
Anything currently marked with @code{GCPRO}.
@end enumerate

  Marking with @code{GCPRO} is necessary because some C functions (quite
a lot, in fact), allocate objects during their operation.  Quite
frequently, there will be no other pointer to the object while the
function is running, and if a garbage collection occurs and the object
needs to be referenced again, bad things will happen.  The solution is
to mark those references with @code{GCPRO}.  Note that it is a
@emph{reference} that is marked with @code{GCPRO}, not an object.  If
you declare a @code{Lisp_Object} variable, assign to it, @code{GCPRO}
it, and then assign to it again, the first object assigned @emph{is not}
protected, while the second object @emph{is} protected.  Unfortunately
@code{GCPRO}ing is easy to forget, and there is basically no way around
this problem.  Here are some rules, though:

@enumerate
@item
A garbage collection can occur whenever anything calls @code{Feval}, or
whenever a @code{QUIT} can occur where execution can continue past
this. (Remember, this is almost anywhere.)  Note that @code{Fsignal} can
GC, and it can return (even though it normally doesn't).  This means
that you must @code{GCPRO} before calling most of the error functions,
including the @samp{CONCHECK} family of macros, if references occur
after the call.

@item
You @emph{must} @code{UNGCPRO} anything that's @code{GCPRO}ed, and you
@emph{must not} @code{UNGCPRO} if you haven't @code{GCPRO}ed.  Getting
either of these wrong will lead to crashes, often in completely random
places unrelated to where the problem lies.  There are some functions
(@code{Fsignal} is the canonical example) which may or may not return.
In these cases, the function is responsible for cleaning up the
@code{GCPRO}s if it doesn't return, so you should treat it as an
ordinary function.

@item
For every @code{GCPRO@var{n}}, there have to be declarations of
@code{struct gcpro gcpro1, gcpro2, ..., gcpro@var{n}}.

@item
The way this actually works is that all currently active @code{GCPRO}s
are chained through the @code{struct gcpro} local variables, with the
variable @samp{gcprolist} pointing to the head of the list and the nth
local @code{gcpro} variable pointing to the first @code{gcpro} variable
in the next enclosing stack frame.  Each @code{GCPRO}ed thing is an
lvalue, and the @code{struct gcpro} local variable contains a pointer to
this lvalue.  This is why things will mess up badly if you don't pair up
the @code{GCPRO}s and @code{UNGCPRO}s---you will end up with
@code{gcprolist}s containing pointers to @code{struct gcpro}s or local
@code{Lisp_Object} variables in no-longer-active stack frames.

@item
It is actually possible for a single @code{struct gcpro} to
protect a contiguous array of any number of values, rather than
just a single lvalue.  To effect this, call @code{GCPRO@var{n}} as usual on
the first object in the array and then set @code{gcpro@var{n}.nvars}.

@item
@strong{Strings are relocated.}  What this means in practice is that the
pointer obtained using @code{XSTRING_DATA()} is liable to change at any
time, and you should never keep it around past any function call, or
pass it as an argument to any function that might cause a garbage
collection.  This is why a number of functions accept either a
``non-relocatable'' @code{char *} pointer or a relocatable Lisp string,
and only access the Lisp string's data at the very last minute.  In some
cases, you may end up having to @code{alloca()} some space and copy the
string's data into it.

@item
By convention, if you have to nest @code{GCPRO}'s, use @code{NGCPRO@var{n}}
(along with @code{struct gcpro ngcpro1, ngcpro2}, etc.), @code{NNGCPRO@var{n}},
etc.  This avoids compiler warnings about shadowed locals.

@item
It is @emph{always} better to err on the side of extra @code{GCPRO}s
rather than too few.  The extra cycles spent on this are
almost never going to make a whit of difference in the
speed of anything.

@item
The general rule to follow is that caller, not callee, @code{GCPRO}s.
That is, you should not have to explicitly @code{GCPRO} any Lisp objects
that are passed in as parameters.

One exception from this rule is if you ever plan to change the parameter
value, and store a new object in it.  In that case, you @emph{must}
@code{GCPRO} the parameter, because otherwise the new object will not be
protected.

So, if you create any Lisp objects (remember, this happens in all sorts
of circumstances, e.g. with @code{Fcons()}, etc.), you are responsible
for @code{GCPRO}ing them, unless you are @emph{absolutely sure} that
there's no possibility that a garbage-collection can occur while you
need to use the object.  Even then, consider @code{GCPRO}ing.

@item
If you have the @emph{least smidgeon of doubt} about whether
you need to @code{GCPRO}, you should @code{GCPRO}.

@item
Beware of @code{GCPRO}ing something that is uninitialized.  If you have
any shade of doubt about this, initialize all your variables to @code{Qnil}.

@item
Be careful of traps, like calling @code{Fcons()} in the argument to
another function.  By the ``caller protects'' law, you should be
@code{GCPRO}ing the newly-created cons, but you aren't.  A certain
number of functions that are commonly called on freshly created stuff
(e.g. @code{nconc2()}, @code{Fsignal()}), break the ``caller protects''
law and go ahead and @code{GCPRO} their arguments so as to simplify
things, but make sure and check if it's OK whenever doing something like
this.

@item
Once again, remember to @code{GCPRO}!  Bugs resulting from insufficient
@code{GCPRO}ing are intermittent and extremely difficult to track down,
often showing up in crashes inside of @code{garbage-collect} or in
weirdly corrupted objects or even in incorrect values in a totally
different section of code.
@end enumerate

If you don't understand whether to @code{GCPRO} in a particular
instance, ask on the mailing lists.  A general hint is that @code{prog1}
is the canonical example.

@cindex garbage collection, conservative
@cindex conservative garbage collection
  Given the extremely error-prone nature of the @code{GCPRO} scheme, and
the difficulties in tracking down, it should be considered a deficiency
in the XEmacs code.  A solution to this problem would involve
implementing so-called @dfn{conservative} garbage collection for the C
stack.  That involves looking through all of stack memory and treating
anything that looks like a reference to an object as a reference.  This
will result in a few objects not getting collected when they should, but
it obviates the need for @code{GCPRO}ing, and allows garbage collection
to happen at any point at all, such as during object allocation.

@node Garbage Collection - Step by Step, Integers and Characters, GCPROing, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@section Garbage Collection - Step by Step
@cindex garbage collection - step by step

@menu
* Invocation::                  
* garbage_collect_1::           
* mark_object::                 
* gc_sweep::                    
* sweep_lcrecords_1::           
* compact_string_chars::        
* sweep_strings::               
* sweep_bit_vectors_1::         
@end menu

@node Invocation, garbage_collect_1, Garbage Collection - Step by Step, Garbage Collection - Step by Step
@subsection Invocation
@cindex garbage collection, invocation

The first thing that anyone should know about garbage collection is:
when and how the garbage collector is invoked. One might think that this
could happen every time new memory is allocated, e.g. new objects are
created, but this is @emph{not} the case. Instead, we have the following
situation:

The entry point of any process of garbage collection is an invocation
of the function @code{garbage_collect_1} in file @code{alloc.c}. The
invocation can occur @emph{explicitly} by calling the function
@code{Fgarbage_collect} (in addition this function provides information
about the freed memory), or can occur @emph{implicitly} in four different
situations:
@enumerate
@item
In function @code{main_1} in file @code{emacs.c}. This function is called
at each startup of xemacs. The garbage collection is invoked after all
initial creations are completed, but only if a special internal error
checking-constant @code{ERROR_CHECK_GC} is defined.
@item
In function @code{disksave_object_finalization} in file
@code{alloc.c}. The only purpose of this function is to clear the
objects from memory which need not be stored with xemacs when we dump out
an executable. This is only done by @code{Fdump_emacs} or by
@code{Fdump_emacs_data} respectively (both in @code{emacs.c}). The
actual clearing is accomplished by making these objects unreachable and
starting a garbage collection. The function is only used while building
xemacs.
@item
In function @code{Feval / eval} in file @code{eval.c}. Each time the
well known and often used function eval is called to evaluate a form,
one of the first things that could happen, is a potential call of
@code{garbage_collect_1}. There exist three global variables,
@code{consing_since_gc} (counts the created cons-cells since the last
garbage collection), @code{gc_cons_threshold} (a specified threshold
after which a garbage collection occurs) and @code{always_gc}. If
@code{always_gc} is set or if the threshold is exceeded, the garbage
collection will start.
@item
In function @code{Ffuncall / funcall} in file @code{eval.c}. This
function evaluates calls of elisp functions and works according to
@code{Feval}.
@end enumerate

The upshot is that garbage collection can basically occur everywhere
@code{Feval}, respectively @code{Ffuncall}, is used - either directly or
through another function. Since calls to these two functions are hidden
in various other functions, many calls to @code{garbage_collect_1} are
not obviously foreseeable, and therefore unexpected. Instances where
they are used that are worth remembering are various elisp commands, as
for example @code{or}, @code{and}, @code{if}, @code{cond}, @code{while},
@code{setq}, etc., miscellaneous @code{gui_item_...} functions,
everything related to @code{eval} (@code{Feval_buffer}, @code{call0},
...) and inside @code{Fsignal}. The latter is used to handle signals, as
for example the ones raised by every @code{QUIT}-macro triggered after
pressing Ctrl-g.

@node garbage_collect_1, mark_object, Invocation, Garbage Collection - Step by Step
@subsection @code{garbage_collect_1}
@cindex @code{garbage_collect_1}

We can now describe exactly what happens after the invocation takes
place.
@enumerate
@item
There are several cases in which the garbage collector is left immediately:
when we are already garbage collecting (@code{gc_in_progress}), when
the garbage collection is somehow forbidden
(@code{gc_currently_forbidden}), when we are currently displaying something
(@code{in_display}) or when we are preparing for the armageddon of the
whole system (@code{preparing_for_armageddon}).
@item
Next the correct frame in which to put
all the output occurring during garbage collecting is determined. In
order to be able to restore the old display's state after displaying the
message, some data about the current cursor position has to be
saved. The variables @code{pre_gc_cursor} and @code{cursor_changed} take
care of that.
@item
The state of @code{gc_currently_forbidden} must be restored after
the garbage collection, no matter what happens during the process. We
accomplish this by @code{record_unwind_protect}ing the suitable function
@code{restore_gc_inhibit} together with the current value of
@code{gc_currently_forbidden}.
@item
If we are concurrently running an interactive xemacs session, the next step
is simply to show the garbage collector's cursor/message.
@item
The following steps are the intrinsic steps of the garbage collector,
therefore @code{gc_in_progress} is set.
@item
For debugging purposes, it is possible to copy the current C stack
frame. However, this seems to be a currently unused feature.
@item
Before actually starting to go over all live objects, references to
objects that are no longer used are pruned. We only have to do this for events
(@code{clear_event_resource}) and for specifiers
(@code{cleanup_specifiers}).
@item
Now the mark phase begins and marks all accessible elements. In order to
start from
all slots that serve as roots of accessibility, the function
@code{mark_object} is called for each root individually to go out from
there to mark all reachable objects. All roots that are traversed are
shown in their processed order:
@itemize @bullet
@item
all constant symbols and static variables that are registered via
@code{staticpro}@ in the dynarr @code{staticpros}.
@xref{Adding Global Lisp Variables}.
@item
all Lisp objects that are created in C functions and that must be
protected from freeing them. They are registered in the global
list @code{gcprolist}.
@xref{GCPROing}.
@item
all local variables (i.e. their name fields @code{symbol} and old
values @code{old_values}) that are bound during the evaluation by the Lisp
engine. They are stored in @code{specbinding} structs pushed on a stack
called @code{specpdl}.
@xref{Dynamic Binding; The specbinding Stack; Unwind-Protects}.
@item
all catch blocks that the Lisp engine encounters during the evaluation
cause the creation of structs @code{catchtag} inserted in the list
@code{catchlist}. Their tag (@code{tag}) and value (@code{val} fields
are freshly created objects and therefore have to be marked.
@xref{Catch and Throw}.
@item
every function application pushes new structs @code{backtrace}
on the call stack of the Lisp engine (@code{backtrace_list}). The unique
parts that have to be marked are the fields for each function
(@code{function}) and all their arguments (@code{args}).
@xref{Evaluation}.
@item
all objects that are used by the redisplay engine that must not be freed
are marked by a special function called @code{mark_redisplay} (in
@code{redisplay.c}).
@item
all objects created for profiling purposes are allocated by C functions
instead of using the lisp allocation mechanisms. In order to receive the
right ones during the sweep phase, they also have to be marked
manually. That is done by the function @code{mark_profiling_info}
@end itemize
@item
Hash tables in XEmacs belong to a kind of special objects that
make use of a concept often called 'weak pointers'.
To make a long story short, these kind of pointers are not followed
during the estimation of the live objects during garbage collection.
Any object referenced only by weak pointers is collected
anyway, and the reference to it is cleared. In hash tables there are
different usage patterns of them, manifesting in different types of hash
tables, namely 'non-weak', 'weak', 'key-weak' and 'value-weak'
(internally also 'key-car-weak' and 'value-car-weak') hash tables, each
clearing entries depending on different conditions. More information can
be found in the documentation to the function @code{make-hash-table}.

Because there are complicated dependency rules about when and what to
mark while processing weak hash tables, the standard @code{marker}
method is only active if it is marking non-weak hash tables. As soon as
a weak component is in the table, the hash table entries are ignored
while marking. Instead their marking is done each separately by the
function @code{finish_marking_weak_hash_tables}. This function iterates
over each hash table entry @code{hentries} for each weak hash table in
@code{Vall_weak_hash_tables}. Depending on the type of a table, the
appropriate action is performed.
If a table is acting as @code{HASH_TABLE_KEY_WEAK}, and a key already marked,
everything reachable from the @code{value} component is marked. If it is
acting as a @code{HASH_TABLE_VALUE_WEAK} and the value component is
already marked, the marking starts beginning only from the
@code{key} component.
If it is a @code{HASH_TABLE_KEY_CAR_WEAK} and the car
of the key entry is already marked, we mark both the @code{key} and
@code{value} components.
Finally, if the table is of the type @code{HASH_TABLE_VALUE_CAR_WEAK}
and the car of the value components is already marked, again both the
@code{key} and the @code{value} components get marked.

Again, there are lists with comparable properties called weak
lists. There exist different peculiarities of their types called
@code{simple}, @code{assoc}, @code{key-assoc} and
@code{value-assoc}. You can find further details about them in the
description to the function @code{make-weak-list}. The scheme of their
marking is similar: all weak lists are listed in @code{Qall_weak_lists},
therefore we iterate over them. The marking is advanced until we hit an
already marked pair. Then we know that during a former run all
the rest has been marked completely. Again, depending on the special
type of the weak list, our jobs differ. If it is a @code{WEAK_LIST_SIMPLE}
and the elem is marked, we mark the @code{cons} part. If it is a
@code{WEAK_LIST_ASSOC} and not a pair or a pair with both marked car and
cdr, we mark the @code{cons} and the @code{elem}. If it is a
@code{WEAK_LIST_KEY_ASSOC} and not a pair or a pair with a marked car of
the elem, we mark the @code{cons} and the @code{elem}. Finally, if it is
a @code{WEAK_LIST_VALUE_ASSOC} and not a pair or a pair with a marked
cdr of the elem, we mark both the @code{cons} and the @code{elem}.

Since, by marking objects in reach from weak hash tables and weak lists,
other objects could get marked, this perhaps implies further marking of
other weak objects, both finishing functions are redone as long as
yet unmarked objects get freshly marked.

@item
After completing the special marking for the weak hash tables and for the weak
lists, all entries that point to objects that are going to be swept in
the further process are useless, and therefore have to be removed from
the table or the list.

The function @code{prune_weak_hash_tables} does the job for weak hash
tables. Totally unmarked hash tables are removed from the list
@code{Vall_weak_hash_tables}. The other ones are treated more carefully
by scanning over all entries and removing one as soon as one of
the components @code{key} and @code{value} is unmarked.

The same idea applies to the weak lists. It is accomplished by
@code{prune_weak_lists}: An unmarked list is pruned from
@code{Vall_weak_lists} immediately. A marked list is treated more
carefully by going over it and removing just the unmarked pairs.

@item
The function @code{prune_specifiers} checks all listed specifiers held
in @code{Vall_specifiers} and removes the ones from the lists that are
unmarked.

@item
All syntax tables are stored in a list called
@code{Vall_syntax_tables}. The function @code{prune_syntax_tables} walks
through it and unlinks the tables that are unmarked.

@item
Next, we will attack the complete sweeping - the function
@code{gc_sweep} which holds the predominance.
@item
First, all the variables with respect to garbage collection are
reset. @code{consing_since_gc} - the counter of the created cells since
the last garbage collection - is set back to 0, and
@code{gc_in_progress} is not @code{true} anymore.
@item
In case the session is interactive, the displayed cursor and message are
removed again.
@item
The state of @code{gc_inhibit} is restored to the former value by
unwinding the stack.
@item
A small memory reserve is always held back that can be reached by
@code{breathing_space}. If nothing more is left, we create a new reserve
and exit.
@end enumerate

@node mark_object, gc_sweep, garbage_collect_1, Garbage Collection - Step by Step
@subsection @code{mark_object}
@cindex @code{mark_object}

The first thing that is checked while marking an object is whether the
object is a real Lisp object @code{Lisp_Type_Record} or just an integer
or a character. Integers and characters are the only two types that are
stored directly - without another level of indirection, and therefore they
don't have to be marked and collected.
@xref{How Lisp Objects Are Represented in C}.

The second case is the one we have to handle. It is the one when we are
dealing with a pointer to a Lisp object. But, there exist also three
possibilities, that prevent us from doing anything while marking: The
object is read only which prevents it from being garbage collected,
i.e. marked (@code{C_READONLY_RECORD_HEADER}). The object in question is
already marked, and need not be marked for the second time (checked by
@code{MARKED_RECORD_HEADER_P}). If it is a special, unmarkable object
(@code{UNMARKABLE_RECORD_HEADER_P}, apparently, these are objects that
sit in some const space, and can therefore not be marked, see
@code{this_one_is_unmarkable} in @code{alloc.c}).

Now, the actual marking is feasible. We do so by once using the macro
@code{MARK_RECORD_HEADER} to mark the object itself (actually the
special flag in the lrecord header), and calling its special marker
"method" @code{marker} if available. The marker method marks every
other object that is in reach from our current object. Note, that these
marker methods should not call @code{mark_object} recursively, but
instead should return the next object from where further marking has to
be performed.

In case another object was returned, as mentioned before, we reiterate
the whole @code{mark_object} process beginning with this next object.

@node gc_sweep, sweep_lcrecords_1, mark_object, Garbage Collection - Step by Step
@subsection @code{gc_sweep}
@cindex @code{gc_sweep}

The job of this function is to free all unmarked records from memory. As
we know, there are different types of objects implemented and managed, and
consequently different ways to free them from memory.
@xref{Introduction to Allocation}.

We start with all objects stored through @code{lcrecords}. All
bulkier objects are allocated and handled using that scheme of
@code{lcrecords}. Each object is @code{malloc}ed separately
instead of placing it in one of the contiguous frob blocks. All types
that are currently stored
using @code{lcrecords}'s  @code{alloc_lcrecord} and
@code{make_lcrecord_list} are the types: vectors, buffers,
char-table, char-table-entry, console, weak-list, database, device,
ldap, hash-table, command-builder, extent-auxiliary, extent-info, face,
coding-system, frame, image-instance, glyph, popup-data, gui-item,
keymap, charset, color_instance, font_instance, opaque, opaque-list,
process, range-table, specifier, symbol-value-buffer-local,
symbol-value-lisp-magic, symbol-value-varalias, toolbar-button,
tooltalk-message, tooltalk-pattern, window, and window-configuration. We
take care of them in the fist place
in order to be able to handle and to finalize items stored in them more
easily. The function @code{sweep_lcrecords_1} as described below is
doing the whole job for us.
For a description about the internals: @xref{lrecords}.

Our next candidates are the other objects that behave quite differently
than everything else: the strings. They consists of two parts, a
fixed-size portion (@code{struct Lisp_String}) holding the string's
length, its property list and a pointer to the second part, and the
actual string data, which is stored in string-chars blocks comparable to
frob blocks. In this block, the data is not only freed, but also a
compression of holes is made, i.e. all strings are relocated together.
@xref{String}. This compacting phase is performed by the function
@code{compact_string_chars}, the actual sweeping by the function
@code{sweep_strings} is described below.

After that, the other types are swept step by step using functions
@code{sweep_conses}, @code{sweep_bit_vectors_1},
@code{sweep_compiled_functions}, @code{sweep_floats},
@code{sweep_symbols}, @code{sweep_extents}, @code{sweep_markers} and
@code{sweep_extents}.  They are the fixed-size types cons, floats,
compiled-functions, symbol, marker, extent, and event stored in
so-called "frob blocks", and therefore we can basically do the same on
every type objects, using the same macros, especially defined only to
handle everything with respect to fixed-size blocks. The only fixed-size
type that is not handled here are the fixed-size portion of strings,
because we took special care of them earlier.

The only big exceptions are bit vectors stored differently and
therefore treated differently by the function @code{sweep_bit_vectors_1}
described later.

At first, we need some brief information about how
these fixed-size types are managed in general, in order to understand
how the sweeping is done. They have all a fixed size, and are therefore
stored in big blocks of memory - allocated at once - that can hold a
certain amount of objects of one type. The macro
@code{DECLARE_FIXED_TYPE_ALLOC} creates the suitable structures for
every type. More precisely, we have the block struct
(holding a pointer to the previous block @code{prev} and the
objects in @code{block[]}), a pointer to current block
(@code{current_..._block)}) and its last index
(@code{current_..._block_index}), and a pointer to the free list that
will be created. Also a macro @code{FIXED_TYPE_FROM_BLOCK} plus some
related macros exists that are used to obtain a new object, either from
the free list @code{ALLOCATE_FIXED_TYPE_1} if there is an unused object
of that type stored or by allocating a completely new block using
@code{ALLOCATE_FIXED_TYPE_FROM_BLOCK}.

The rest works as follows: all of them define a
macro @code{UNMARK_...} that is used to unmark the object. They define a
macro @code{ADDITIONAL_FREE_...} that defines additional work that has
to be done when converting an object from in use to not in use (so far,
only markers use it in order to unchain them). Then, they all call
the macro @code{SWEEP_FIXED_TYPE_BLOCK} instantiated with their type name
and their struct name.

This call in particular does the following: we go over all blocks
starting with the current moving towards the oldest.
For each block, we look at every object in it. If the object already
freed (checked with @code{FREE_STRUCT_P} using the first pointer of the
object), or if it is
set to read only (@code{C_READONLY_RECORD_HEADER_P}, nothing must be
done. If it is unmarked (checked with @code{MARKED_RECORD_HEADER_P}), it
is put in the free list and set free (using the macro
@code{FREE_FIXED_TYPE}, otherwise it stays in the block, but is unmarked
(by @code{UNMARK_...}). While going through one block, we note if the
whole block is empty. If so, the whole block is freed (using
@code{xfree}) and the free list state is set to the state it had before
handling this block.

@node sweep_lcrecords_1, compact_string_chars, gc_sweep, Garbage Collection - Step by Step
@subsection @code{sweep_lcrecords_1}
@cindex @code{sweep_lcrecords_1}

After nullifying the complete lcrecord statistics, we go over all
lcrecords two separate times. They are all chained together in a list with
a head called @code{all_lcrecords}.

The first loop calls for each object its @code{finalizer} method, but only
in the case that it is not read only
(@code{C_READONLY_RECORD_HEADER_P)}, it is not already marked
(@code{MARKED_RECORD_HEADER_P}), it is not already in a free list (list of
freed objects, field @code{free}) and finally it owns a finalizer
method.

The second loop actually frees the appropriate objects again by iterating
through the whole list. In case an object is read only or marked, it
has to persist, otherwise it is manually freed by calling
@code{xfree}. During this loop, the lcrecord statistics are kept up to
date by calling @code{tick_lcrecord_stats} with the right arguments,

@node compact_string_chars, sweep_strings, sweep_lcrecords_1, Garbage Collection - Step by Step
@subsection @code{compact_string_chars}
@cindex @code{compact_string_chars}

The purpose of this function is to compact all the data parts of the
strings that are held in so-called @code{string_chars_block}, i.e. the
strings that do not exceed a certain maximal length.

The procedure with which this is done is as follows. We are keeping two
positions in the @code{string_chars_block}s using two pointer/integer
pairs, namely @code{from_sb}/@code{from_pos} and
@code{to_sb}/@code{to_pos}. They stand for the actual positions, from
where to where, to copy the actually handled string.

While going over all chained @code{string_char_block}s and their held
strings, staring at @code{first_string_chars_block}, both pointers
are advanced and eventually a string is copied from @code{from_sb} to
@code{to_sb}, depending on the status of the pointed at strings.

More precisely, we can distinguish between the following actions.
@itemize @bullet
@item
The string at @code{from_sb}'s position could be marked as free, which
is indicated by an invalid pointer to the pointer that should point back
to the fixed size string object, and which is checked by
@code{FREE_STRUCT_P}. In this case, the @code{from_sb}/@code{from_pos}
is advanced to the next string, and nothing has to be copied.
@item
Also, if a string object itself is unmarked, nothing has to be
copied. We likewise advance the @code{from_sb}/@code{from_pos}
pair as described above.
@item
In all other cases, we have a marked string at hand. The string data
must be moved from the from-position to the to-position. In case
there is not enough space in the actual @code{to_sb}-block, we advance
this pointer to the beginning of the next block before copying. In case the
from and to positions are different, we perform the
actual copying using the library function @code{memmove}.
@end itemize

After compacting, the pointer to the current
@code{string_chars_block}, sitting in @code{current_string_chars_block},
is reset on the last block to which we moved a string,
i.e. @code{to_block}, and all remaining blocks (we know that they just
carry garbage) are explicitly @code{xfree}d.

@node sweep_strings, sweep_bit_vectors_1, compact_string_chars, Garbage Collection - Step by Step
@subsection @code{sweep_strings}
@cindex @code{sweep_strings}

The sweeping for the fixed sized string objects is essentially exactly
the same as it is for all other fixed size types. As before, the freeing
into the suitable free list is done by using the macro
@code{SWEEP_FIXED_SIZE_BLOCK} after defining the right macros
@code{UNMARK_string} and @code{ADDITIONAL_FREE_string}. These two
definitions are a little bit special compared to the ones used
for the other fixed size types.

@code{UNMARK_string} is defined the same way except some additional code
used for updating the bookkeeping information.

For strings, @code{ADDITIONAL_FREE_string} has to do something in
addition: in case, the string was not allocated in a
@code{string_chars_block} because it exceeded the maximal length, and
therefore it was @code{malloc}ed separately, we know also @code{xfree}
it explicitly.

@node sweep_bit_vectors_1,  , sweep_strings, Garbage Collection - Step by Step
@subsection @code{sweep_bit_vectors_1}
@cindex @code{sweep_bit_vectors_1}

Bit vectors are also one of the rare types that are @code{malloc}ed
individually. Consequently, while sweeping, all further needless
bit vectors must be freed by hand. This is done, as one might imagine,
the expected way: since they are all registered in a list called
@code{all_bit_vectors}, all elements of that list are traversed,
all unmarked bit vectors are unlinked by calling @code{xfree} and all of
them become unmarked.
In addition, the bookkeeping information used for garbage
collector's output purposes is updated.

@node Integers and Characters, Allocation from Frob Blocks, Garbage Collection - Step by Step, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@section Integers and Characters
@cindex integers and characters
@cindex characters, integers and

  Integer and character Lisp objects are created from integers using the
macros @code{XSETINT()} and @code{XSETCHAR()} or the equivalent
functions @code{make_int()} and @code{make_char()}. (These are actually
macros on most systems.)  These functions basically just do some moving
of bits around, since the integral value of the object is stored
directly in the @code{Lisp_Object}.

  @code{XSETINT()} and the like will truncate values given to them that
are too big; i.e. you won't get the value you expected but the tag bits
will at least be correct.

@node Allocation from Frob Blocks, lrecords, Integers and Characters, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@section Allocation from Frob Blocks
@cindex allocation from frob blocks
@cindex frob blocks, allocation from

The uninitialized memory required by a @code{Lisp_Object} of a particular type
is allocated using
@code{ALLOCATE_FIXED_TYPE()}.  This only occurs inside of the
lowest-level object-creating functions in @file{alloc.c}:
@code{Fcons()}, @code{make_float()}, @code{Fmake_byte_code()},
@code{Fmake_symbol()}, @code{allocate_extent()},
@code{allocate_event()}, @code{Fmake_marker()}, and
@code{make_uninit_string()}.  The idea is that, for each type, there are
a number of frob blocks (each 2K in size); each frob block is divided up
into object-sized chunks.  Each frob block will have some of these
chunks that are currently assigned to objects, and perhaps some that are
free. (If a frob block has nothing but free chunks, it is freed at the
end of the garbage collection cycle.)  The free chunks are stored in a
free list, which is chained by storing a pointer in the first four bytes
of the chunk. (Except for the free chunks at the end of the last frob
block, which are handled using an index which points past the end of the
last-allocated chunk in the last frob block.)
@code{ALLOCATE_FIXED_TYPE()} first tries to retrieve a chunk from the
free list; if that fails, it calls
@code{ALLOCATE_FIXED_TYPE_FROM_BLOCK()}, which looks at the end of the
last frob block for space, and creates a new frob block if there is
none. (There are actually two versions of these macros, one of which is
more defensive but less efficient and is used for error-checking.)

@node lrecords, Low-level allocation, Allocation from Frob Blocks, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@section lrecords
@cindex lrecords

  [see @file{lrecord.h}]

  All lrecords have at the beginning of their structure a @code{struct
lrecord_header}.  This just contains a type number and some flags,
including the mark bit.  All builtin type numbers are defined as
constants in @code{enum lrecord_type}, to allow the compiler to generate
more efficient code for @code{@var{type}P}.  The type number, thru the
@code{lrecord_implementation_table}, gives access to a @code{struct
lrecord_implementation}, which is a structure containing method pointers
and such.  There is one of these for each type, and it is a global,
constant, statically-declared structure that is declared in the
@code{DEFINE_LRECORD_IMPLEMENTATION()} macro.

  Simple lrecords (of type (b) above) just have a @code{struct
lrecord_header} at their beginning.  lcrecords, however, actually have a
@code{struct lcrecord_header}.  This, in turn, has a @code{struct
lrecord_header} at its beginning, so sanity is preserved; but it also
has a pointer used to chain all lcrecords together, and a special ID
field used to distinguish one lcrecord from another. (This field is used
only for debugging and could be removed, but the space gain is not
significant.)

  Simple lrecords are created using @code{ALLOCATE_FIXED_TYPE()}, just
like for other frob blocks.  The only change is that the implementation
pointer must be initialized correctly. (The implementation structure for
an lrecord, or rather the pointer to it, is named @code{lrecord_float},
@code{lrecord_extent}, @code{lrecord_buffer}, etc.)

  lcrecords are created using @code{alloc_lcrecord()}.  This takes a
size to allocate and an implementation pointer. (The size needs to be
passed because some lcrecords, such as window configurations, are of
variable size.) This basically just @code{malloc()}s the storage,
initializes the @code{struct lcrecord_header}, and chains the lcrecord
onto the head of the list of all lcrecords, which is stored in the
variable @code{all_lcrecords}.  The calls to @code{alloc_lcrecord()}
generally occur in the lowest-level allocation function for each lrecord
type.

Whenever you create an lrecord, you need to call either
@code{DEFINE_LRECORD_IMPLEMENTATION()} or
@code{DEFINE_LRECORD_SEQUENCE_IMPLEMENTATION()}.  This needs to be
specified in a @file{.c} file, at the top level.  What this actually
does is define and initialize the implementation structure for the
lrecord. (And possibly declares a function @code{error_check_foo()} that
implements the @code{XFOO()} macro when error-checking is enabled.)  The
arguments to the macros are the actual type name (this is used to
construct the C variable name of the lrecord implementation structure
and related structures using the @samp{##} macro concatenation
operator), a string that names the type on the Lisp level (this may not
be the same as the C type name; typically, the C type name has
underscores, while the Lisp string has dashes), various method pointers,
and the name of the C structure that contains the object.  The methods
are used to encapsulate type-specific information about the object, such
as how to print it or mark it for garbage collection, so that it's easy
to add new object types without having to add a specific case for each
new type in a bunch of different places.

  The difference between @code{DEFINE_LRECORD_IMPLEMENTATION()} and
@code{DEFINE_LRECORD_SEQUENCE_IMPLEMENTATION()} is that the former is
used for fixed-size object types and the latter is for variable-size
object types.  Most object types are fixed-size; some complex
types, however (e.g. window configurations), are variable-size.
Variable-size object types have an extra method, which is called
to determine the actual size of a particular object of that type.
(Currently this is only used for keeping allocation statistics.)

  For the purpose of keeping allocation statistics, the allocation
engine keeps a list of all the different types that exist.  Note that,
since @code{DEFINE_LRECORD_IMPLEMENTATION()} is a macro that is
specified at top-level, there is no way for it to initialize the global
data structures containing type information, like
@code{lrecord_implementations_table}.  For this reason a call to
@code{INIT_LRECORD_IMPLEMENTATION} must be added to the same source file
containing @code{DEFINE_LRECORD_IMPLEMENTATION}, but instead of to the
top level, to one of the init functions, typically
@code{syms_of_@var{foo}.c}.  @code{INIT_LRECORD_IMPLEMENTATION} must be
called before an object of this type is used.

The type number is also used to index into an array holding the number
of objects of each type and the total memory allocated for objects of
that type.  The statistics in this array are computed during the sweep
stage.  These statistics are returned by the call to
@code{garbage-collect}.

  Note that for every type defined with a @code{DEFINE_LRECORD_*()}
macro, there needs to be a @code{DECLARE_LRECORD_IMPLEMENTATION()}
somewhere in a @file{.h} file, and this @file{.h} file needs to be
included by @file{inline.c}.

  Furthermore, there should generally be a set of @code{XFOOBAR()},
@code{FOOBARP()}, etc. macros in a @file{.h} (or occasionally @file{.c})
file.  To create one of these, copy an existing model and modify as
necessary.

  @strong{Please note:} If you define an lrecord in an external
dynamically-loaded module, you must use @code{DECLARE_EXTERNAL_LRECORD},
@code{DEFINE_EXTERNAL_LRECORD_IMPLEMENTATION}, and
@code{DEFINE_EXTERNAL_LRECORD_SEQUENCE_IMPLEMENTATION} instead of the
non-EXTERNAL forms. These macros will dynamically add new type numbers
to the global enum that records them, whereas the non-EXTERNAL forms
assume that the programmer has already inserted the correct type numbers
into the enum's code at compile-time.

  The various methods in the lrecord implementation structure are:

@enumerate
@item
@cindex mark method
A @dfn{mark} method.  This is called during the marking stage and passed
a function pointer (usually the @code{mark_object()} function), which is
used to mark an object.  All Lisp objects that are contained within the
object need to be marked by applying this function to them.  The mark
method should also return a Lisp object, which should be either @code{nil} or
an object to mark. (This can be used in lieu of calling
@code{mark_object()} on the object, to reduce the recursion depth, and
consequently should be the most heavily nested sub-object, such as a
long list.)

@strong{Please note:} When the mark method is called, garbage collection
is in progress, and special precautions need to be taken when accessing
objects; see section (B) above.

If your mark method does not need to do anything, it can be
@code{NULL}.

@item
A @dfn{print} method.  This is called to create a printed representation
of the object, whenever @code{princ}, @code{prin1}, or the like is
called.  It is passed the object, a stream to which the output is to be
directed, and an @code{escapeflag} which indicates whether the object's
printed representation should be @dfn{escaped} so that it is
readable. (This corresponds to the difference between @code{princ} and
@code{prin1}.) Basically, @dfn{escaped} means that strings will have
quotes around them and confusing characters in the strings such as
quotes, backslashes, and newlines will be backslashed; and that special
care will be taken to make symbols print in a readable fashion
(e.g. symbols that look like numbers will be backslashed).  Other
readable objects should perhaps pass @code{escapeflag} on when
sub-objects are printed, so that readability is preserved when necessary
(or if not, always pass in a 1 for @code{escapeflag}).  Non-readable
objects should in general ignore @code{escapeflag}, except that some use
it as an indication that more verbose output should be given.

Sub-objects are printed using @code{print_internal()}, which takes
exactly the same arguments as are passed to the print method.

Literal C strings should be printed using @code{write_c_string()},
or @code{write_string_1()} for non-null-terminated strings.

Functions that do not have a readable representation should check the
@code{print_readably} flag and signal an error if it is set.

If you specify NULL for the print method, the
@code{default_object_printer()} will be used.

@item
A @dfn{finalize} method.  This is called at the beginning of the sweep
stage on lcrecords that are about to be freed, and should be used to
perform any extra object cleanup.  This typically involves freeing any
extra @code{malloc()}ed memory associated with the object, releasing any
operating-system and window-system resources associated with the object
(e.g. pixmaps, fonts), etc.

The finalize method can be NULL if nothing needs to be done.

WARNING #1: The finalize method is also called at the end of the dump
phase; this time with the for_disksave parameter set to non-zero.  The
object is @emph{not} about to disappear, so you have to make sure to
@emph{not} free any extra @code{malloc()}ed memory if you're going to
need it later.  (Also, signal an error if there are any operating-system
and window-system resources here, because they can't be dumped.)

Finalize methods should, as a rule, set to zero any pointers after
they've been freed, and check to make sure pointers are not zero before
freeing.  Although I'm pretty sure that finalize methods are not called
twice on the same object (except for the @code{for_disksave} proviso),
we've gotten nastily burned in some cases by not doing this.

WARNING #2: The finalize method is @emph{only} called for
lcrecords, @emph{not} for simply lrecords.  If you need a
finalize method for simple lrecords, you have to stick
it in the @code{ADDITIONAL_FREE_foo()} macro in @file{alloc.c}.

WARNING #3: Things are in an @emph{extremely} bizarre state
when @code{ADDITIONAL_FREE_foo()} is called, so you have to
be incredibly careful when writing one of these functions.
See the comment in @code{gc_sweep()}.  If you ever have to add
one of these, consider using an lcrecord or dealing with
the problem in a different fashion.

@item
An @dfn{equal} method.  This compares the two objects for similarity,
when @code{equal} is called.  It should compare the contents of the
objects in some reasonable fashion.  It is passed the two objects and a
@dfn{depth} value, which is used to catch circular objects.  To compare
sub-Lisp-objects, call @code{internal_equal()} and bump the depth value
by one.  If this value gets too high, a @code{circular-object} error
will be signaled.

If this is NULL, objects are @code{equal} only when they are @code{eq},
i.e. identical.

@item
A @dfn{hash} method.  This is used to hash objects when they are to be
compared with @code{equal}.  The rule here is that if two objects are
@code{equal}, they @emph{must} hash to the same value; i.e. your hash
function should use some subset of the sub-fields of the object that are
compared in the ``equal'' method.  If you specify this method as
@code{NULL}, the object's pointer will be used as the hash, which will
@emph{fail} if the object has an @code{equal} method, so don't do this.

To hash a sub-Lisp-object, call @code{internal_hash()}.  Bump the
depth by one, just like in the ``equal'' method.

To convert a Lisp object directly into a hash value (using
its pointer), use @code{LISP_HASH()}.  This is what happens when
the hash method is NULL.

To hash two or more values together into a single value, use
@code{HASH2()}, @code{HASH3()}, @code{HASH4()}, etc.

@item
@dfn{getprop}, @dfn{putprop}, @dfn{remprop}, and @dfn{plist} methods.
These are used for object types that have properties.  I don't feel like
documenting them here.  If you create one of these objects, you have to
use different macros to define them,
i.e. @code{DEFINE_LRECORD_IMPLEMENTATION_WITH_PROPS()} or
@code{DEFINE_LRECORD_SEQUENCE_IMPLEMENTATION_WITH_PROPS()}.

@item
A @dfn{size_in_bytes} method, when the object is of variable-size.
(i.e. declared with a @code{_SEQUENCE_IMPLEMENTATION} macro.)  This should
simply return the object's size in bytes, exactly as you might expect.
For an example, see the methods for window configurations and opaques.
@end enumerate

@node Low-level allocation, Cons, lrecords, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@section Low-level allocation
@cindex low-level allocation
@cindex allocation, low-level

  Memory that you want to allocate directly should be allocated using
@code{xmalloc()} rather than @code{malloc()}.  This implements
error-checking on the return value, and once upon a time did some more
vital stuff (i.e. @code{BLOCK_INPUT}, which is no longer necessary).
Free using @code{xfree()}, and realloc using @code{xrealloc()}.  Note
that @code{xmalloc()} will do a non-local exit if the memory can't be
allocated. (Many functions, however, do not expect this, and thus XEmacs
will likely crash if this happens.  @strong{This is a bug.}  If you can,
you should strive to make your function handle this OK.  However, it's
difficult in the general circumstance, perhaps requiring extra
unwind-protects and such.)

  Note that XEmacs provides two separate replacements for the standard
@code{malloc()} library function.  These are called @dfn{old GNU malloc}
(@file{malloc.c}) and @dfn{new GNU malloc} (@file{gmalloc.c}),
respectively.  New GNU malloc is better in pretty much every way than
old GNU malloc, and should be used if possible.  (It used to be that on
some systems, the old one worked but the new one didn't.  I think this
was due specifically to a bug in SunOS, which the new one now works
around; so I don't think the old one ever has to be used any more.) The
primary difference between both of these mallocs and the standard system
malloc is that they are much faster, at the expense of increased space.
The basic idea is that memory is allocated in fixed chunks of powers of
two.  This allows for basically constant malloc time, since the various
chunks can just be kept on a number of free lists. (The standard system
malloc typically allocates arbitrary-sized chunks and has to spend some
time, sometimes a significant amount of time, walking the heap looking
for a free block to use and cleaning things up.)  The new GNU malloc
improves on things by allocating large objects in chunks of 4096 bytes
rather than in ever larger powers of two, which results in ever larger
wastage.  There is a slight speed loss here, but it's of doubtful
significance.

  NOTE: Apparently there is a third-generation GNU malloc that is
significantly better than the new GNU malloc, and should probably
be included in XEmacs.

  There is also the relocating allocator, @file{ralloc.c}.  This actually
moves blocks of memory around so that the @code{sbrk()} pointer shrunk
and virtual memory released back to the system.  On some systems,
this is a big win.  On all systems, it causes a noticeable (and
sometimes huge) speed penalty, so I turn it off by default.
@file{ralloc.c} only works with the new GNU malloc in @file{gmalloc.c}.
There are also two versions of @file{ralloc.c}, one that uses @code{mmap()}
rather than block copies to move data around.  This purports to
be faster, although that depends on the amount of data that would
have had to be block copied and the system-call overhead for
@code{mmap()}.  I don't know exactly how this works, except that the
relocating-allocation routines are pretty much used only for
the memory allocated for a buffer, which is the biggest consumer
of space, esp. of space that may get freed later.

  Note that the GNU mallocs have some ``memory warning'' facilities.
XEmacs taps into them and issues a warning through the standard
warning system, when memory gets to 75%, 85%, and 95% full.
(On some systems, the memory warnings are not functional.)

  Allocated memory that is going to be used to make a Lisp object
is created using @code{allocate_lisp_storage()}.  This just calls
@code{xmalloc()}.  It used to verify that the pointer to the memory can
fit into a Lisp word, before the current Lisp object representation was
introduced.  @code{allocate_lisp_storage()} is called by
@code{alloc_lcrecord()}, @code{ALLOCATE_FIXED_TYPE()}, and the vector
and bit-vector creation routines.  These routines also call
@code{INCREMENT_CONS_COUNTER()} at the appropriate times; this keeps
statistics on how much memory is allocated, so that garbage-collection
can be invoked when the threshold is reached.

@node Cons, Vector, Low-level allocation, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@section Cons
@cindex cons

  Conses are allocated in standard frob blocks.  The only thing to
note is that conses can be explicitly freed using @code{free_cons()}
and associated functions @code{free_list()} and @code{free_alist()}.  This
immediately puts the conses onto the cons free list, and decrements
the statistics on memory allocation appropriately.  This is used
to good effect by some extremely commonly-used code, to avoid
generating extra objects and thereby triggering GC sooner.
However, you have to be @emph{extremely} careful when doing this.
If you mess this up, you will get BADLY BURNED, and it has happened
before.

@node Vector, Bit Vector, Cons, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@section Vector
@cindex vector

  As mentioned above, each vector is @code{malloc()}ed individually, and
all are threaded through the variable @code{all_vectors}.  Vectors are
marked strangely during garbage collection, by kludging the size field.
Note that the @code{struct Lisp_Vector} is declared with its
@code{contents} field being a @emph{stretchy} array of one element.  It
is actually @code{malloc()}ed with the right size, however, and access
to any element through the @code{contents} array works fine.

@node Bit Vector, Symbol, Vector, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@section Bit Vector
@cindex bit vector
@cindex vector, bit

  Bit vectors work exactly like vectors, except for more complicated
code to access an individual bit, and except for the fact that bit
vectors are lrecords while vectors are not. (The only difference here is
that there's an lrecord implementation pointer at the beginning and the
tag field in bit vector Lisp words is ``lrecord'' rather than
``vector''.)

@node Symbol, Marker, Bit Vector, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@section Symbol
@cindex symbol

  Symbols are also allocated in frob blocks.  Symbols in the awful
horrible obarray structure are chained through their @code{next} field.

Remember that @code{intern} looks up a symbol in an obarray, creating
one if necessary.

@node Marker, String, Symbol, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@section Marker
@cindex marker

  Markers are allocated in frob blocks, as usual.  They are kept
in a buffer unordered, but in a doubly-linked list so that they
can easily be removed. (Formerly this was a singly-linked list,
but in some cases garbage collection took an extraordinarily
long time due to the O(N^2) time required to remove lots of
markers from a buffer.) Markers are removed from a buffer in
the finalize stage, in @code{ADDITIONAL_FREE_marker()}.

@node String, Compiled Function, Marker, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@section String
@cindex string

  As mentioned above, strings are a special case.  A string is logically
two parts, a fixed-size object (containing the length, property list,
and a pointer to the actual data), and the actual data in the string.
The fixed-size object is a @code{struct Lisp_String} and is allocated in
frob blocks, as usual.  The actual data is stored in special
@dfn{string-chars blocks}, which are 8K blocks of memory.
Currently-allocated strings are simply laid end to end in these
string-chars blocks, with a pointer back to the @code{struct Lisp_String}
stored before each string in the string-chars block.  When a new string
needs to be allocated, the remaining space at the end of the last
string-chars block is used if there's enough, and a new string-chars
block is created otherwise.

  There are never any holes in the string-chars blocks due to the string
compaction and relocation that happens at the end of garbage collection.
During the sweep stage of garbage collection, when objects are
reclaimed, the garbage collector goes through all string-chars blocks,
looking for unused strings.  Each chunk of string data is preceded by a
pointer to the corresponding @code{struct Lisp_String}, which indicates
both whether the string is used and how big the string is, i.e. how to
get to the next chunk of string data.  Holes are compressed by
block-copying the next string into the empty space and relocating the
pointer stored in the corresponding @code{struct Lisp_String}.
@strong{This means you have to be careful with strings in your code.}
See the section above on @code{GCPRO}ing.

  Note that there is one situation not handled: a string that is too big
to fit into a string-chars block.  Such strings, called @dfn{big
strings}, are all @code{malloc()}ed as their own block. (#### Although it
would make more sense for the threshold for big strings to be somewhat
lower, e.g. 1/2 or 1/4 the size of a string-chars block.  It seems that
this was indeed the case formerly---indeed, the threshold was set at
1/8---but Mly forgot about this when rewriting things for 19.8.)

Note also that the string data in string-chars blocks is padded as
necessary so that proper alignment constraints on the @code{struct
Lisp_String} back pointers are maintained.

  Finally, strings can be resized.  This happens in Mule when a
character is substituted with a different-length character, or during
modeline frobbing. (You could also export this to Lisp, but it's not
done so currently.) Resizing a string is a potentially tricky process.
If the change is small enough that the padding can absorb it, nothing
other than a simple memory move needs to be done.  Keep in mind,
however, that the string can't shrink too much because the offset to the
next string in the string-chars block is computed by looking at the
length and rounding to the nearest multiple of four or eight.  If the
string would shrink or expand beyond the correct padding, new string
data needs to be allocated at the end of the last string-chars block and
the data moved appropriately.  This leaves some dead string data, which
is marked by putting a special marker of 0xFFFFFFFF in the @code{struct
Lisp_String} pointer before the data (there's no real @code{struct
Lisp_String} to point to and relocate), and storing the size of the dead
string data (which would normally be obtained from the now-non-existent
@code{struct Lisp_String}) at the beginning of the dead string data gap.
The string compactor recognizes this special 0xFFFFFFFF marker and
handles it correctly.

@node Compiled Function,  , String, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp
@section Compiled Function
@cindex compiled function
@cindex function, compiled

  Not yet documented.


@node The Lisp Reader and Compiler, Evaluation; Stack Frames; Bindings, Allocation of Objects in XEmacs Lisp, Top
@chapter The Lisp Reader and Compiler
@cindex Lisp reader and compiler, the
@cindex reader and compiler, the Lisp
@cindex compiler, the Lisp reader and

Not yet documented.

@node Evaluation; Stack Frames; Bindings, Symbols and Variables, The Lisp Reader and Compiler, Top
@chapter Evaluation; Stack Frames; Bindings
@cindex evaluation; stack frames; bindings
@cindex stack frames; bindings, evaluation;
@cindex bindings, evaluation; stack frames;

@menu
* Evaluation::                  
* Dynamic Binding; The specbinding Stack; Unwind-Protects::  
* Simple Special Forms::        
* Catch and Throw::             
* Error Trapping::              
@end menu

@node Evaluation, Dynamic Binding; The specbinding Stack; Unwind-Protects, Evaluation; Stack Frames; Bindings, Evaluation; Stack Frames; Bindings
@section Evaluation
@cindex evaluation

  @code{Feval()} evaluates the form (a Lisp object) that is passed to
it.  Note that evaluation is only non-trivial for two types of objects:
symbols and conses.  A symbol is evaluated simply by calling
@code{symbol-value} on it and returning the value.

  Evaluating a cons means calling a function.  First, @code{eval} checks
to see if garbage-collection is necessary, and calls
@code{garbage_collect_1()} if so.  It then increases the evaluation
depth by 1 (@code{lisp_eval_depth}, which is always less than
@code{max_lisp_eval_depth}) and adds an element to the linked list of
@code{struct backtrace}'s (@code{backtrace_list}).  Each such structure
contains a pointer to the function being called plus a list of the
function's arguments.  Originally these values are stored unevalled, and
as they are evaluated, the backtrace structure is updated.  Garbage
collection pays attention to the objects pointed to in the backtrace
structures (garbage collection might happen while a function is being
called or while an argument is being evaluated, and there could easily
be no other references to the arguments in the argument list; once an
argument is evaluated, however, the unevalled version is not needed by
eval, and so the backtrace structure is changed).

At this point, the function to be called is determined by looking at
the car of the cons (if this is a symbol, its function definition is
retrieved and the process repeated).  The function should then consist
of either a @code{Lisp_Subr} (built-in function written in C), a
@code{Lisp_Compiled_Function} object, or a cons whose car is one of the
symbols @code{autoload}, @code{macro} or @code{lambda}.

If the function is a @code{Lisp_Subr}, the lisp object points to a
@code{struct Lisp_Subr} (created by @code{DEFUN()}), which contains a
pointer to the C function, a minimum and maximum number of arguments
(or possibly the special constants @code{MANY} or @code{UNEVALLED}), a
pointer to the symbol referring to that subr, and a couple of other
things.  If the subr wants its arguments @code{UNEVALLED}, they are
passed raw as a list.  Otherwise, an array of evaluated arguments is
created and put into the backtrace structure, and either passed whole
(@code{MANY}) or each argument is passed as a C argument.

If the function is a @code{Lisp_Compiled_Function},
@code{funcall_compiled_function()} is called.  If the function is a
lambda list, @code{funcall_lambda()} is called.  If the function is a
macro, [..... fill in] is done.  If the function is an autoload,
@code{do_autoload()} is called to load the definition and then eval
starts over [explain this more].

When @code{Feval()} exits, the evaluation depth is reduced by one, the
debugger is called if appropriate, and the current backtrace structure
is removed from the list.

Both @code{funcall_compiled_function()} and @code{funcall_lambda()} need
to go through the list of formal parameters to the function and bind
them to the actual arguments, checking for @code{&rest} and
@code{&optional} symbols in the formal parameters and making sure the
number of actual arguments is correct.
@code{funcall_compiled_function()} can do this a little more
efficiently, since the formal parameter list can be checked for sanity
when the compiled function object is created.

@code{funcall_lambda()} simply calls @code{Fprogn} to execute the code
in the lambda list.

@code{funcall_compiled_function()} calls the real byte-code interpreter
@code{execute_optimized_program()} on the byte-code instructions, which
are converted into an internal form for faster execution.

When a compiled function is executed for the first time by
@code{funcall_compiled_function()}, or during the dump phase of building
XEmacs, the byte-code instructions are converted from a
@code{Lisp_String} (which is inefficient to access, especially in the
presence of MULE) into a @code{Lisp_Opaque} object containing an array
of unsigned char, which can be directly executed by the byte-code
interpreter.  At this time the byte code is also analyzed for validity
and transformed into a more optimized form, so that
@code{execute_optimized_program()} can really fly.

Here are some of the optimizations performed by the internal byte-code
transformer:
@enumerate
@item
References to the @code{constants} array are checked for out-of-range
indices, so that the byte interpreter doesn't have to.
@item
References to the @code{constants} array that will be used as a Lisp
variable are checked for being correct non-constant (i.e. not @code{t},
@code{nil}, or @code{keywordp}) symbols, so that the byte interpreter
doesn't have to.
@item
The maximum number of variable bindings in the byte-code is
pre-computed, so that space on the @code{specpdl} stack can be
pre-reserved once for the whole function execution.
@item
All byte-code jumps are relative to the current program counter instead
of the start of the program, thereby saving a register.
@item
One-byte relative jumps are converted from the byte-code form of unsigned
chars offset by 127 to machine-friendly signed chars.
@end enumerate

Of course, this transformation of the @code{instructions} should not be
visible to the user, so @code{Fcompiled_function_instructions()} needs
to know how to convert the optimized opaque object back into a Lisp
string that is identical to the original string from the @file{.elc}
file.  (Actually, the resulting string may (rarely) contain slightly
different, yet equivalent, byte code.)

@code{Ffuncall()} implements Lisp @code{funcall}.  @code{(funcall fun
x1 x2 x3 ...)} is equivalent to @code{(eval (list fun (quote x1) (quote
x2) (quote x3) ...))}.  @code{Ffuncall()} contains its own code to do
the evaluation, however, and is very similar to @code{Feval()}.

From the performance point of view, it is worth knowing that most of the
time in Lisp evaluation is spent executing @code{Lisp_Subr} and
@code{Lisp_Compiled_Function} objects via @code{Ffuncall()} (not
@code{Feval()}).

@code{Fapply()} implements Lisp @code{apply}, which is very similar to
@code{funcall} except that if the last argument is a list, the result is the
same as if each of the arguments in the list had been passed separately.
@code{Fapply()} does some business to expand the last argument if it's a
list, then calls @code{Ffuncall()} to do the work.

@code{apply1()}, @code{call0()}, @code{call1()}, @code{call2()}, and
@code{call3()} call a function, passing it the argument(s) given (the
arguments are given as separate C arguments rather than being passed as
an array).  @code{apply1()} uses @code{Fapply()} while the others use
@code{Ffuncall()} to do the real work.

@node Dynamic Binding; The specbinding Stack; Unwind-Protects, Simple Special Forms, Evaluation, Evaluation; Stack Frames; Bindings
@section Dynamic Binding; The specbinding Stack; Unwind-Protects
@cindex dynamic binding; the specbinding stack; unwind-protects
@cindex binding; the specbinding stack; unwind-protects, dynamic
@cindex specbinding stack; unwind-protects, dynamic binding; the
@cindex unwind-protects, dynamic binding; the specbinding stack;

@example
struct specbinding
@{
  Lisp_Object symbol;
  Lisp_Object old_value;
  Lisp_Object (*func) (Lisp_Object); /* for unwind-protect */
@};
@end example

  @code{struct specbinding} is used for local-variable bindings and
unwind-protects.  @code{specpdl} holds an array of @code{struct specbinding}'s,
@code{specpdl_ptr} points to the beginning of the free bindings in the
array, @code{specpdl_size} specifies the total number of binding slots
in the array, and @code{max_specpdl_size} specifies the maximum number
of bindings the array can be expanded to hold.  @code{grow_specpdl()}
increases the size of the @code{specpdl} array, multiplying its size by
2 but never exceeding @code{max_specpdl_size} (except that if this
number is less than 400, it is first set to 400).

  @code{specbind()} binds a symbol to a value and is used for local
variables and @code{let} forms.  The symbol and its old value (which
might be @code{Qunbound}, indicating no prior value) are recorded in the
specpdl array, and @code{specpdl_size} is increased by 1.

  @code{record_unwind_protect()} implements an @dfn{unwind-protect},
which, when placed around a section of code, ensures that some specified
cleanup routine will be executed even if the code exits abnormally
(e.g. through a @code{throw} or quit).  @code{record_unwind_protect()}
simply adds a new specbinding to the @code{specpdl} array and stores the
appropriate information in it.  The cleanup routine can either be a C
function, which is stored in the @code{func} field, or a @code{progn}
form, which is stored in the @code{old_value} field.

  @code{unbind_to()} removes specbindings from the @code{specpdl} array
until the specified position is reached.  Each specbinding can be one of
three types:

@enumerate
@item
an unwind-protect with a C cleanup function (@code{func} is not 0, and
@code{old_value} holds an argument to be passed to the function);
@item
an unwind-protect with a Lisp form (@code{func} is 0, @code{symbol}
is @code{nil}, and @code{old_value} holds the form to be executed with
@code{Fprogn()}); or
@item
a local-variable binding (@code{func} is 0, @code{symbol} is not
@code{nil}, and @code{old_value} holds the old value, which is stored as
the symbol's value).
@end enumerate

@node Simple Special Forms, Catch and Throw, Dynamic Binding; The specbinding Stack; Unwind-Protects, Evaluation; Stack Frames; Bindings
@section Simple Special Forms
@cindex special forms, simple

@code{or}, @code{and}, @code{if}, @code{cond}, @code{progn},
@code{prog1}, @code{prog2}, @code{setq}, @code{quote}, @code{function},
@code{let*}, @code{let}, @code{while}

All of these are very simple and work as expected, calling
@code{Feval()} or @code{Fprogn()} as necessary and (in the case of
@code{let} and @code{let*}) using @code{specbind()} to create bindings
and @code{unbind_to()} to undo the bindings when finished.

Note that, with the exception of @code{Fprogn}, these functions are
typically called in real life only in interpreted code, since the byte
compiler knows how to convert calls to these functions directly into
byte code.

@node Catch and Throw, Error Trapping, Simple Special Forms, Evaluation; Stack Frames; Bindings
@section Catch and Throw
@cindex catch and throw
@cindex throw, catch and

@example
struct catchtag
@{
  Lisp_Object tag;
  Lisp_Object val;
  struct catchtag *next;
  struct gcpro *gcpro;
  jmp_buf jmp;
  struct backtrace *backlist;
  int lisp_eval_depth;
  int pdlcount;
@};
@end example

  @code{catch} is a Lisp function that places a catch around a body of
code.  A catch is a means of non-local exit from the code.  When a catch
is created, a tag is specified, and executing a @code{throw} to this tag
will exit from the body of code caught with this tag, and its value will
be the value given in the call to @code{throw}.  If there is no such
call, the code will be executed normally.

  Information pertaining to a catch is held in a @code{struct catchtag},
which is placed at the head of a linked list pointed to by
@code{catchlist}.  @code{internal_catch()} is passed a C function to
call (@code{Fprogn()} when Lisp @code{catch} is called) and arguments to
give it, and places a catch around the function.  Each @code{struct
catchtag} is held in the stack frame of the @code{internal_catch()}
instance that created the catch.

  @code{internal_catch()} is fairly straightforward.  It stores into the
@code{struct catchtag} the tag name and the current values of
@code{backtrace_list}, @code{lisp_eval_depth}, @code{gcprolist}, and the
offset into the @code{specpdl} array, sets a jump point with @code{_setjmp()}
(storing the jump point into the @code{struct catchtag}), and calls the
function.  Control will return to @code{internal_catch()} either when
the function exits normally or through a @code{_longjmp()} to this jump
point.  In the latter case, @code{throw} will store the value to be
returned into the @code{struct catchtag} before jumping.  When it's
done, @code{internal_catch()} removes the @code{struct catchtag} from
the catchlist and returns the proper value.

  @code{Fthrow()} goes up through the catchlist until it finds one with
a matching tag.  It then calls @code{unbind_catch()} to restore
everything to what it was when the appropriate catch was set, stores the
return value in the @code{struct catchtag}, and jumps (with
@code{_longjmp()}) to its jump point.

  @code{unbind_catch()} removes all catches from the catchlist until it
finds the correct one.  Some of the catches might have been placed for
error-trapping, and if so, the appropriate entries on the handlerlist
must be removed (see ``errors'').  @code{unbind_catch()} also restores
the values of @code{gcprolist}, @code{backtrace_list}, and
@code{lisp_eval}, and calls @code{unbind_to()} to undo any specbindings
created since the catch.

@node Error Trapping,  , Catch and Throw, Evaluation; Stack Frames; Bindings
@section Error Trapping
@cindex error trapping

@subheading call_trapping_problems():

This is equivalent to (*fun) (arg), except that various conditions
can be trapped or inhibited, according to FLAGS.

@itemize @bullet
@item
If FLAGS does not contain NO_INHIBIT_ERRORS, when an error occurs,
the error is caught and a warning is issued, specifying the
specific error that occurred and a backtrace.  In that case,
WARNING_STRING should be given, and will be printed at the
beginning of the error to indicate where the error occurred.

@item
If FLAGS does not contain NO_INHIBIT_THROWS, all attempts to
@code{throw} out of the function being called are trapped, and a warning
issued. (Again, WARNING_STRING should be given.)

@item
If FLAGS contains INHIBIT_WARNING_ISSUE, no warnings are issued;
this applies to recursive invocations of call_trapping_problems, too.

@item
If FLAGS contains POSTPONE_WARNING_ISSUE, no warnings are issued;
but values useful for generating a warning are still computed (in
particular, the backtrace), so that the calling function can issue
a warning.

@item
If FLAGS contains ISSUE_WARNINGS_AT_DEBUG_LEVEL, warnings will be
issued, but at level @code{debug}, which normally is below the minimum
specified by @code{log-warning-minimum-level}, meaning such warnings will
be ignored entirely.  The user can change this variable, however,
to see the warnings.)

Note: If neither of NO_INHIBIT_THROWS or NO_INHIBIT_ERRORS is
given, you are @strong{guaranteed} that there will be no non-local exits
out of this function.

@item
If FLAGS contains INHIBIT_QUIT, QUIT using C-g is inhibited.  (This
is @strong{rarely} a good idea.  Unless you use NO_INHIBIT_ERRORS, QUIT is
automatically caught as well, and treated as an error; you can
check for this using EQ (problems->error_conditions, Qquit).

@item
If FLAGS contains UNINHIBIT_QUIT, QUIT checking will be explicitly
turned on. (It will abort the code being called, but will still be
trapped and reported as an error, unless NO_INHIBIT_ERRORS is
given.) This is useful when QUIT checking has been turned off by a
higher-level caller.

@item
If FLAGS contains INHIBIT_GC, garbage collection is inhibited.
This is useful for Lisp called within redisplay, for example.

@item
If FLAGS contains INHIBIT_EXISTING_PERMANENT_DISPLAY_OBJECT_DELETION,
Lisp code is not allowed to delete any window, buffers, frames, devices,
or consoles that were already in existence at the time this function
was called. (However, it's perfectly legal for code to create a new
buffer and then delete it.)

#### It might be useful to have a flag that inhibits deletion of a
specific permanent display object and everything it's attached to
(e.g. a window, and the buffer, frame, device, and console it's
attached to.

@item
If FLAGS contains INHIBIT_EXISTING_BUFFER_TEXT_MODIFICATION, Lisp
code is not allowed to modify the text of any buffers that were
already in existence at the time this function was called.
(However, it's perfectly legal for code to create a new buffer and
then modify its text.)

@quotation
[These last two flags are implemented using global variables
Vdeletable_permanent_display_objects and Vmodifiable_buffers,
which keep track of a list of all buffers or permanent display
objects created since the last time one of these flags was set.
The code that deletes buffers, etc. and modifies buffers checks
 
@enumerate
@item
if the corresponding flag is set (through the global variable
inhibit_flags or its accessor function get_inhibit_flags()), and

@item
if the object to be modified or deleted is not in the
appropriate list.
@end enumerate
 
If so, it signals an error.

Recursive calls to call_trapping_problems() are allowed.  In
the case of the two flags mentioned above, the current values
of the global variables are stored in an unwind-protect, and
they're reset to nil.]
@end quotation
 
@item
If FLAGS contains INHIBIT_ENTERING_DEBUGGER, the debugger will not
be entered if an error occurs inside the Lisp code being called,
even when the user has requested an error.  In such case, a warning
is issued stating that access to the debugger is denied, unless
INHIBIT_WARNING_ISSUE has also been supplied.  This is useful when
calling Lisp code inside redisplay, in menu callbacks, etc. because
in such cases either the display is in an inconsistent state or
doing window operations is explicitly forbidden by the OS, and the
debugger would causes visual changes on the screen and might create
another frame.

@item
If FLAGS contains INHIBIT_ANY_CHANGE_AFFECTING_REDISPLAY, no
changes of any sort to extents, faces, glyphs, buffer text,
specifiers relating to display, other variables relating to
display, splitting, deleting, or resizing windows or frames,
deleting buffers, windows, frames, devices, or consoles, etc. is
allowed.  This is for things called absolutely in the middle of
redisplay, which expects things to be @strong{exactly} the same after the
call as before.  This isn't completely implemented and needs to be
thought out some more to determine exactly what its semantics are.
For the moment, turning on this flag also turns on

@itemize @minus
@item
INHIBIT_EXISTING_PERMANENT_DISPLAY_OBJECT_DELETION
@item
INHIBIT_EXISTING_BUFFER_TEXT_MODIFICATION
@item
INHIBIT_ENTERING_DEBUGGER
@item
INHIBIT_WARNING_ISSUE
@item
INHIBIT_GC
@end itemize

@item
#### The following five flags are defined, but unimplemented:

#define INHIBIT_EXISTING_CODING_SYSTEM_DELETION (1<<6)
#define INHIBIT_EXISTING_CHARSET_DELETION (1<<7)
#define INHIBIT_PERMANENT_DISPLAY_OBJECT_CREATION (1<<8)
#define INHIBIT_CODING_SYSTEM_CREATION (1<<9)
#define INHIBIT_CHARSET_CREATION (1<<10)

@item
FLAGS containing CALL_WITH_SUSPENDED_ERRORS is a sign that
call_with_suspended_errors() was invoked.  This exists only for
debugging purposes -- often we want to break when a signal happens,
but ignore signals from call_with_suspended_errors(), because they
occur often and for legitimate reasons.
@end itemize

If PROBLEM is non-zero, it should be a pointer to a structure into
which exact information about any occurring problems (either an
error or an attempted throw past this boundary).

If a problem occurred and aborted operation (error, quit, or
invalid throw), Qunbound is returned.  Otherwise the return value
from the call to (*fun) (arg) is returned.

@node Symbols and Variables, Buffers, Evaluation; Stack Frames; Bindings, Top
@chapter Symbols and Variables
@cindex symbols and variables
@cindex variables, symbols and

@menu
* Introduction to Symbols::     
* Obarrays::                    
* Symbol Values::               
@end menu

@node Introduction to Symbols, Obarrays, Symbols and Variables, Symbols and Variables
@section Introduction to Symbols
@cindex symbols, introduction to

  A symbol is basically just an object with four fields: a name (a
string), a value (some Lisp object), a function (some Lisp object), and
a property list (usually a list of alternating keyword/value pairs).
What makes symbols special is that there is usually only one symbol with
a given name, and the symbol is referred to by name.  This makes a
symbol a convenient way of calling up data by name, i.e. of implementing
variables. (The variable's value is stored in the @dfn{value slot}.)
Similarly, functions are referenced by name, and the definition of the
function is stored in a symbol's @dfn{function slot}.  This means that
there can be a distinct function and variable with the same name.  The
property list is used as a more general mechanism of associating
additional values with particular names, and once again the namespace is
independent of the function and variable namespaces.

@node Obarrays, Symbol Values, Introduction to Symbols, Symbols and Variables
@section Obarrays
@cindex obarrays

  The identity of symbols with their names is accomplished through a
structure called an obarray, which is just a poorly-implemented hash
table mapping from strings to symbols whose name is that string. (I say
``poorly implemented'' because an obarray appears in Lisp as a vector
with some hidden fields rather than as its own opaque type.  This is an
Emacs Lisp artifact that should be fixed.)

  Obarrays are implemented as a vector of some fixed size (which should
be a prime for best results), where each ``bucket'' of the vector
contains one or more symbols, threaded through a hidden @code{next}
field in the symbol.  Lookup of a symbol in an obarray, and adding a
symbol to an obarray, is accomplished through standard hash-table
techniques.

  The standard Lisp function for working with symbols and obarrays is
@code{intern}.  This looks up a symbol in an obarray given its name; if
it's not found, a new symbol is automatically created with the specified
name, added to the obarray, and returned.  This is what happens when the
Lisp reader encounters a symbol (or more precisely, encounters the name
of a symbol) in some text that it is reading.  There is a standard
obarray called @code{obarray} that is used for this purpose, although
the Lisp programmer is free to create his own obarrays and @code{intern}
symbols in them.

  Note that, once a symbol is in an obarray, it stays there until
something is done about it, and the standard obarray @code{obarray}
always stays around, so once you use any particular variable name, a
corresponding symbol will stay around in @code{obarray} until you exit
XEmacs.

  Note that @code{obarray} itself is a variable, and as such there is a
symbol in @code{obarray} whose name is @code{"obarray"} and which
contains @code{obarray} as its value.

  Note also that this call to @code{intern} occurs only when in the Lisp
reader, not when the code is executed (at which point the symbol is
already around, stored as such in the definition of the function).

  You can create your own obarray using @code{make-vector} (this is
horrible but is an artifact) and intern symbols into that obarray.
Doing that will result in two or more symbols with the same name.
However, at most one of these symbols is in the standard @code{obarray}:
You cannot have two symbols of the same name in any particular obarray.
Note that you cannot add a symbol to an obarray in any fashion other
than using @code{intern}: i.e. you can't take an existing symbol and put
it in an existing obarray.  Nor can you change the name of an existing
symbol. (Since obarrays are vectors, you can violate the consistency of
things by storing directly into the vector, but let's ignore that
possibility.)

  Usually symbols are created by @code{intern}, but if you really want,
you can explicitly create a symbol using @code{make-symbol}, giving it
some name.  The resulting symbol is not in any obarray (i.e. it is
@dfn{uninterned}), and you can't add it to any obarray.  Therefore its
primary purpose is as a symbol to use in macros to avoid namespace
pollution.  It can also be used as a carrier of information, but cons
cells could probably be used just as well.

  You can also use @code{intern-soft} to look up a symbol but not create
a new one, and @code{unintern} to remove a symbol from an obarray.  This
returns the removed symbol. (Remember: You can't put the symbol back
into any obarray.) Finally, @code{mapatoms} maps over all of the symbols
in an obarray.

@node Symbol Values,  , Obarrays, Symbols and Variables
@section Symbol Values
@cindex symbol values
@cindex values, symbol

  The value field of a symbol normally contains a Lisp object.  However,
a symbol can be @dfn{unbound}, meaning that it logically has no value.
This is internally indicated by storing a special Lisp object, called
@dfn{the unbound marker} and stored in the global variable
@code{Qunbound}.  The unbound marker is of a special Lisp object type
called @dfn{symbol-value-magic}.  It is impossible for the Lisp
programmer to directly create or access any object of this type.

  @strong{You must not let any ``symbol-value-magic'' object escape to
the Lisp level.}  Printing any of these objects will cause the message
@samp{INTERNAL EMACS BUG} to appear as part of the print representation.
(You may see this normally when you call @code{debug_print()} from the
debugger on a Lisp object.) If you let one of these objects escape to
the Lisp level, you will violate a number of assumptions contained in
the C code and make the unbound marker not function right.

  When a symbol is created, its value field (and function field) are set
to @code{Qunbound}.  The Lisp programmer can restore these conditions
later using @code{makunbound} or @code{fmakunbound}, and can query to
see whether the value of function fields are @dfn{bound} (i.e. have a
value other than @code{Qunbound}) using @code{boundp} and
@code{fboundp}.  The fields are set to a normal Lisp object using
@code{set} (or @code{setq}) and @code{fset}.

  Other symbol-value-magic objects are used as special markers to
indicate variables that have non-normal properties.  This includes any
variables that are tied into C variables (setting the variable magically
sets some global variable in the C code, and likewise for retrieving the
variable's value), variables that magically tie into slots in the
current buffer, variables that are buffer-local, etc.  The
symbol-value-magic object is stored in the value cell in place of
a normal object, and the code to retrieve a symbol's value
(i.e. @code{symbol-value}) knows how to do special things with them.
This means that you should not just fetch the value cell directly if you
want a symbol's value.

  The exact workings of this are rather complex and involved and are
well-documented in comments in @file{buffer.c}, @file{symbols.c}, and
@file{lisp.h}.

@node Buffers, Text, Symbols and Variables, Top
@chapter Buffers
@cindex buffers

@menu
* Introduction to Buffers::     A buffer holds a block of text such as a file.
* Buffer Lists::                Keeping track of all buffers.
* Markers and Extents::         Tagging locations within a buffer.
* The Buffer Object::           The Lisp object corresponding to a buffer.
@end menu

@node Introduction to Buffers, Buffer Lists, Buffers, Buffers
@section Introduction to Buffers
@cindex buffers, introduction to

  A buffer is logically just a Lisp object that holds some text.
In this, it is like a string, but a buffer is optimized for
frequent insertion and deletion, while a string is not.  Furthermore:

@enumerate
@item
Buffers are @dfn{permanent} objects, i.e. once you create them, they
remain around, and need to be explicitly deleted before they go away.
@item
Each buffer has a unique name, which is a string.  Buffers are
normally referred to by name.  In this respect, they are like
symbols.
@item
Buffers have a default insertion position, called @dfn{point}.
Inserting text (unless you explicitly give a position) goes at point,
and moves point forward past the text.  This is what is going on when
you type text into Emacs.
@item
Buffers have lots of extra properties associated with them.
@item
Buffers can be @dfn{displayed}.  What this means is that there
exist a number of @dfn{windows}, which are objects that correspond
to some visible section of your display, and each window has
an associated buffer, and the current contents of the buffer
are shown in that section of the display.  The redisplay mechanism
(which takes care of doing this) knows how to look at the
text of a buffer and come up with some reasonable way of displaying
this.  Many of the properties of a buffer control how the
buffer's text is displayed.
@item
One buffer is distinguished and called the @dfn{current buffer}.  It is
stored in the variable @code{current_buffer}.  Buffer operations operate
on this buffer by default.  When you are typing text into a buffer, the
buffer you are typing into is always @code{current_buffer}.  Switching
to a different window changes the current buffer.  Note that Lisp code
can temporarily change the current buffer using @code{set-buffer} (often
enclosed in a @code{save-excursion} so that the former current buffer
gets restored when the code is finished).  However, calling
@code{set-buffer} will NOT cause a permanent change in the current
buffer.  The reason for this is that the top-level event loop sets
@code{current_buffer} to the buffer of the selected window, each time
it finishes executing a user command.
@end enumerate

  Make sure you understand the distinction between @dfn{current buffer}
and @dfn{buffer of the selected window}, and the distinction between
@dfn{point} of the current buffer and @dfn{window-point} of the selected
window. (This latter distinction is explained in detail in the section
on windows.)

@node Buffer Lists, Markers and Extents, Introduction to Buffers, Buffers
@section Buffer Lists
@cindex buffer lists

  Recall earlier that buffers are @dfn{permanent} objects, i.e.  that
they remain around until explicitly deleted.  This entails that there is
a list of all the buffers in existence.  This list is actually an
assoc-list (mapping from the buffer's name to the buffer) and is stored
in the global variable @code{Vbuffer_alist}.

  The order of the buffers in the list is important: the buffers are
ordered approximately from most-recently-used to least-recently-used.
Switching to a buffer using @code{switch-to-buffer},
@code{pop-to-buffer}, etc. and switching windows using
@code{other-window}, etc.  usually brings the new current buffer to the
front of the list.  @code{switch-to-buffer}, @code{other-buffer},
etc. look at the beginning of the list to find an alternative buffer to
suggest.  You can also explicitly move a buffer to the end of the list
using @code{bury-buffer}.

  In addition to the global ordering in @code{Vbuffer_alist}, each frame
has its own ordering of the list.  These lists always contain the same
elements as in @code{Vbuffer_alist} although possibly in a different
order.  @code{buffer-list} normally returns the list for the selected
frame.  This allows you to work in separate frames without things
interfering with each other.

  The standard way to look up a buffer given a name is
@code{get-buffer}, and the standard way to create a new buffer is
@code{get-buffer-create}, which looks up a buffer with a given name,
creating a new one if necessary.  These operations correspond exactly
with the symbol operations @code{intern-soft} and @code{intern},
respectively.  You can also force a new buffer to be created using
@code{generate-new-buffer}, which takes a name and (if necessary) makes
a unique name from this by appending a number, and then creates the
buffer.  This is basically like the symbol operation @code{gensym}.

@node Markers and Extents, The Buffer Object, Buffer Lists, Buffers
@section Markers and Extents
@cindex markers and extents
@cindex extents, markers and

  Among the things associated with a buffer are things that are
logically attached to certain buffer positions.  This can be used to
keep track of a buffer position when text is inserted and deleted, so
that it remains at the same spot relative to the text around it; to
assign properties to particular sections of text; etc.  There are two
such objects that are useful in this regard: they are @dfn{markers} and
@dfn{extents}.

  A @dfn{marker} is simply a flag placed at a particular buffer
position, which is moved around as text is inserted and deleted.
Markers are used for all sorts of purposes, such as the @code{mark} that
is the other end of textual regions to be cut, copied, etc.

  An @dfn{extent} is similar to two markers plus some associated
properties, and is used to keep track of regions in a buffer as text is
inserted and deleted, and to add properties (e.g. fonts) to particular
regions of text.  The external interface of extents is explained
elsewhere.

  The important thing here is that markers and extents simply contain
buffer positions in them as integers, and every time text is inserted or
deleted, these positions must be updated.  In order to minimize the
amount of shuffling that needs to be done, the positions in markers and
extents (there's one per marker, two per extent) are stored in Membpos's.
This means that they only need to be moved when the text is physically
moved in memory; since the gap structure tries to minimize this, it also
minimizes the number of marker and extent indices that need to be
adjusted.  Look in @file{insdel.c} for the details of how this works.

  One other important distinction is that markers are @dfn{temporary}
while extents are @dfn{permanent}.  This means that markers disappear as
soon as there are no more pointers to them, and correspondingly, there
is no way to determine what markers are in a buffer if you are just
given the buffer.  Extents remain in a buffer until they are detached
(which could happen as a result of text being deleted) or the buffer is
deleted, and primitives do exist to enumerate the extents in a buffer.

@node The Buffer Object,  , Markers and Extents, Buffers
@section The Buffer Object
@cindex buffer object, the
@cindex object, the buffer

  Buffers contain fields not directly accessible by the Lisp programmer.
We describe them here, naming them by the names used in the C code.
Many are accessible indirectly in Lisp programs via Lisp primitives.

@table @code
@item name
The buffer name is a string that names the buffer.  It is guaranteed to
be unique.  @xref{Buffer Names,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp Reference
Manual}.

@item save_modified
This field contains the time when the buffer was last saved, as an
integer.  @xref{Buffer Modification,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp Reference
Manual}.

@item modtime
This field contains the modification time of the visited file.  It is
set when the file is written or read.  Every time the buffer is written
to the file, this field is compared to the modification time of the
file.  @xref{Buffer Modification,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp Reference
Manual}.

@item auto_save_modified
This field contains the time when the buffer was last auto-saved.

@item last_window_start
This field contains the @code{window-start} position in the buffer as of
the last time the buffer was displayed in a window.

@item undo_list
This field points to the buffer's undo list.  @xref{Undo,,, lispref,
XEmacs Lisp Reference Manual}.

@item syntax_table_v
This field contains the syntax table for the buffer.  @xref{Syntax
Tables,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp Reference Manual}.

@item downcase_table
This field contains the conversion table for converting text to lower
case.  @xref{Case Tables,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp Reference Manual}.

@item upcase_table
This field contains the conversion table for converting text to upper
case.  @xref{Case Tables,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp Reference Manual}.

@item case_canon_table
This field contains the conversion table for canonicalizing text for
case-folding search.  @xref{Case Tables,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp
Reference Manual}.

@item case_eqv_table
This field contains the equivalence table for case-folding search.
@xref{Case Tables,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp Reference Manual}.

@item display_table
This field contains the buffer's display table, or @code{nil} if it
doesn't have one.  @xref{Display Tables,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp
Reference Manual}.

@item markers
This field contains the chain of all markers that currently point into
the buffer.  Deletion of text in the buffer, and motion of the buffer's
gap, must check each of these markers and perhaps update it.
@xref{Markers,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp Reference Manual}.

@item backed_up
This field is a flag that tells whether a backup file has been made for
the visited file of this buffer.

@item mark
This field contains the mark for the buffer.  The mark is a marker,
hence it is also included on the list @code{markers}.  @xref{The Mark,,,
lispref, XEmacs Lisp Reference Manual}.

@item mark_active
This field is non-@code{nil} if the buffer's mark is active.

@item local_var_alist
This field contains the association list describing the variables local
in this buffer, and their values, with the exception of local variables
that have special slots in the buffer object.  (Those slots are omitted
from this table.)  @xref{Buffer-Local Variables,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp
Reference Manual}.

@item modeline_format
This field contains a Lisp object which controls how to display the mode
line for this buffer.  @xref{Modeline Format,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp
Reference Manual}.

@item base_buffer
This field holds the buffer's base buffer (if it is an indirect buffer),
or @code{nil}.
@end table

@node Text, Multilingual Support, Buffers, Top
@chapter Text
@cindex text

@menu
* The Text in a Buffer::        Representation of the text in a buffer.
* Ibytes and Ichars::           Representation of individual characters.
* Byte-Char Position Conversion::  
* Searching and Matching::      Higher-level algorithms.
@end menu

@node The Text in a Buffer, Ibytes and Ichars, Text, Text
@section The Text in a Buffer
@cindex text in a buffer, the
@cindex buffer, the text in a

  The text in a buffer consists of a sequence of zero or more
characters.  A @dfn{character} is an integer that logically represents
a letter, number, space, or other unit of text.  Most of the characters
that you will typically encounter belong to the ASCII set of characters,
but there are also characters for various sorts of accented letters,
special symbols, Chinese and Japanese ideograms (i.e. Kanji, Katakana,
etc.), Cyrillic and Greek letters, etc.  The actual number of possible
characters is quite large.

  For now, we can view a character as some non-negative integer that
has some shape that defines how it typically appears (e.g. as an
uppercase A). (The exact way in which a character appears depends on the
font used to display the character.) The internal type of characters in
the C code is an @code{Ichar}; this is just an @code{int}, but using a
symbolic type makes the code clearer.

  Between every character in a buffer is a @dfn{buffer position} or
@dfn{character position}.  We can speak of the character before or after
a particular buffer position, and when you insert a character at a
particular position, all characters after that position end up at new
positions.  When we speak of the character @dfn{at} a position, we
really mean the character after the position.  (This schizophrenia
between a buffer position being ``between'' two characters and ``on'' a
character is rampant in Emacs.)

  Buffer positions are numbered starting at 1.  This means that
position 1 is before the first character, and position 0 is not
valid.  If there are N characters in a buffer, then buffer
position N+1 is after the last one, and position N+2 is not valid.

  The internal makeup of the Ichar integer varies depending on whether
we have compiled with MULE support.  If not, the Ichar integer is an
8-bit integer with possible values from 0 - 255.  0 - 127 are the
standard ASCII characters, while 128 - 255 are the characters from the
ISO-8859-1 character set.  If we have compiled with MULE support, an
Ichar is a 19-bit integer, with the various bits having meanings
according to a complex scheme that will be detailed later.  The
characters numbered 0 - 255 still have the same meanings as for the
non-MULE case, though.

  Internally, the text in a buffer is represented in a fairly simple
fashion: as a contiguous array of bytes, with a @dfn{gap} of some size
in the middle.  Although the gap is of some substantial size in bytes,
there is no text contained within it: From the perspective of the text
in the buffer, it does not exist.  The gap logically sits at some buffer
position, between two characters (or possibly at the beginning or end of
the buffer).  Insertion of text in a buffer at a particular position is
always accomplished by first moving the gap to that position
(i.e. through some block moving of text), then writing the text into the
beginning of the gap, thereby shrinking the gap.  If the gap shrinks
down to nothing, a new gap is created. (What actually happens is that a
new gap is ``created'' at the end of the buffer's text, which requires
nothing more than changing a couple of indices; then the gap is
``moved'' to the position where the insertion needs to take place by
moving up in memory all the text after that position.)  Similarly,
deletion occurs by moving the gap to the place where the text is to be
deleted, and then simply expanding the gap to include the deleted text.
(@dfn{Expanding} and @dfn{shrinking} the gap as just described means
just that the internal indices that keep track of where the gap is
located are changed.)

  Note that the total amount of memory allocated for a buffer text never
decreases while the buffer is live.  Therefore, if you load up a
20-megabyte file and then delete all but one character, there will be a
20-megabyte gap, which won't get any smaller (except by inserting
characters back again).  Once the buffer is killed, the memory allocated
for the buffer text will be freed, but it will still be sitting on the
heap, taking up virtual memory, and will not be released back to the
operating system. (However, if you have compiled XEmacs with rel-alloc,
the situation is different.  In this case, the space @emph{will} be
released back to the operating system.  However, this tends to result in a
noticeable speed penalty.)

  Astute readers may notice that the text in a buffer is represented as
an array of @emph{bytes}, while (at least in the MULE case) an Ichar is
a 19-bit integer, which clearly cannot fit in a byte.  This means (of
course) that the text in a buffer uses a different representation from
an Ichar: specifically, the 19-bit Ichar becomes a series of one to
four bytes.  The conversion between these two representations is complex
and will be described later.

  In the non-MULE case, everything is very simple: An Ichar
is an 8-bit value, which fits neatly into one byte.

  If we are given a buffer position and want to retrieve the
character at that position, we need to follow these steps:

@enumerate
@item
Pretend there's no gap, and convert the buffer position into a @dfn{byte
index} that indexes to the appropriate byte in the buffer's stream of
textual bytes.  By convention, byte indices begin at 1, just like buffer
positions.  In the non-MULE case, byte indices and buffer positions are
identical, since one character equals one byte.
@item
Convert the byte index into a @dfn{memory index}, which takes the gap
into account.  The memory index is a direct index into the block of
memory that stores the text of a buffer.  This basically just involves
checking to see if the byte index is past the gap, and if so, adding the
size of the gap to it.  By convention, memory indices begin at 1, just
like buffer positions and byte indices, and when referring to the
position that is @dfn{at} the gap, we always use the memory position at
the @emph{beginning}, not at the end, of the gap.
@item
Fetch the appropriate bytes at the determined memory position.
@item
Convert these bytes into an Ichar.
@end enumerate

  In the non-Mule case, (3) and (4) boil down to a simple one-byte
memory access.

  Note that we have defined three types of positions in a buffer:

@enumerate
@item
@dfn{buffer positions} or @dfn{character positions}, typedef @code{Charbpos}
@item
@dfn{byte indices}, typedef @code{Bytebpos}
@item
@dfn{memory indices}, typedef @code{Membpos}
@end enumerate

  All three typedefs are just @code{int}s, but defining them this way makes
things a lot clearer.

  Most code works with buffer positions.  In particular, all Lisp code
that refers to text in a buffer uses buffer positions.  Lisp code does
not know that byte indices or memory indices exist.

  Finally, we have a typedef for the bytes in a buffer.  This is a
@code{Ibyte}, which is an unsigned char.  Referring to them as
Ibytes underscores the fact that we are working with a string of bytes
in the internal Emacs buffer representation rather than in one of a
number of possible alternative representations (e.g. EUC-encoded text,
etc.).

@node Ibytes and Ichars, Byte-Char Position Conversion, The Text in a Buffer, Text
@section Ibytes and Ichars
@cindex Ibytes and Ichars
@cindex Ichars, Ibytes and

  Not yet documented.

@node Byte-Char Position Conversion, Searching and Matching, Ibytes and Ichars, Text
@section Byte-Char Position Conversion
@cindex byte-char position conversion
@cindex position conversion, byte-char
@cindex conversion, byte-char position

Oct 2004:

This is what I wrote when describing the previous algorithm:

@quotation
The basic algorithm we use is to keep track of a known region of
characters in each buffer, all of which are of the same width.  We keep
track of the boundaries of the region in both Charbpos and Bytebpos
coordinates and also keep track of the char width, which is 1 - 4 bytes.
If the position we're translating is not in the known region, then we
invoke a function to update the known region to surround the position in
question.  This assumes locality of reference, which is usually the
case.

Note that the function to update the known region can be simple or
complicated depending on how much information we cache.  In addition to
the known region, we always cache the correct conversions for point,
BEGV, and ZV, and in addition to this we cache 16 positions where the
conversion is known.  We only look in the cache or update it when we
need to move the known region more than a certain amount (currently 50
chars), and then we throw away a "random" value and replace it with the
newly calculated value.

Finally, we maintain an extra flag that tracks whether the buffer is
entirely ASCII, to speed up the conversions even more.  This flag is
actually of dubious value because in an entirely-ASCII buffer the known
region will always span the entire buffer (in fact, we update the flag
based on this fact), and so all we're saving is a few machine cycles.

A potentially smarter method than what we do with known regions and
cached positions would be to keep some sort of pseudo-extent layer over
the buffer; maybe keep track of the charbpos/bytebpos correspondence at
the beginning of each line, which would allow us to do a binary search
over the pseudo-extents to narrow things down to the correct line, at
which point you could use a linear movement method.  This would also
mesh well with efficiently implementing a line-numbering scheme.
However, you have to weigh the amount of time spent updating the cache
vs. the savings that result from it.  In reality, we modify the buffer
far less often than we access it, so a cache of this sort that provides
guaranteed LOG (N) performance (or perhaps N * LOG (N), if we set a
maximum on the cache size) would indeed be a win, particularly in very
large buffers.  If we ever implement this, we should probably set a
reasonably high minimum below which we use the old method, because the
time spent updating the fancy cache would likely become dominant when
making buffer modifications in smaller buffers.

Note also that we have to multiply or divide by the char width in order
to convert the positions.  We do some tricks to avoid ever actually
having to do a multiply or divide, because that is typically an
expensive operation (esp. divide).  Multiplying or dividing by 1, 2, or
4 can be implemented simply as a shift left or shift right, and we keep
track of a shifter value (0, 1, or 2) indicating how much to shift.
Multiplying by 3 can be implemented by doubling and then adding the
original value.  Dividing by 3, alas, cannot be implemented in any
simple shift/subtract method, as far as I know; so we just do a table
lookup.  For simplicity, we use a table of size 128K, which indexes the
"divide-by-3" values for the first 64K non-negative numbers. (Note that
we can increase the size up to 384K, i.e. indexing the first 192K
non-negative numbers, while still using shorts in the array.) This also
means that the size of the known region can be at most 64K for
width-three characters.
@end quotation

Unfortunately, it turned out that the implementation had serious problems
which had never been corrected.  In particular, the known region had a
large tendency to become zero-length and stay that way.

So I decided to port the algorithm from FSF 21.3, in markers.c.

This algorithm is fairly simple.  Instead of using markers I kept the cache
array of known positions from the previous implementation.

Basically, we keep a number of positions cached:

@itemize @bullet
@item
the actual end of the buffer
@item
the beginning and end of the accessible region
@item
the value of point
@item
the position of the gap
@item
the last value we computed
@item
a set of positions that are "far away" from previously computed positions
(5000 chars currently; #### perhaps should be smaller)
@end itemize

For each position, we @code{CONSIDER()} it.  This means:

@itemize @bullet
@item
If the position is what we're looking for, return it directly.
@item
Starting with the beginning and end of the buffer, we successively
compute the smallest enclosing range of known positions.  If at any
point we discover that this range has the same byte and char length
(i.e. is entirely single-byte), then our computation is trivial.
@item
If at any point we get a small enough range (50 chars currently),
stop considering further positions.
@end itemize

Otherwise, once we have an enclosing range, see which side is closer, and
iterate until we find the desired value.  As an optimization, I replaced
the simple loop in FSF with the use of @code{bytecount_to_charcount()},
@code{charcount_to_bytecount()}, @code{bytecount_to_charcount_down()}, or
@code{charcount_to_bytecount_down()}. (The latter two I added for this purpose.) 
These scan 4 or 8 bytes at a time through purely single-byte characters.

If the amount we had to scan was more than our "far away" distance (5000
characters, see above), then cache the new position.

#### Things to do:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Look at the most recent GNU Emacs to see whether anything has changed.
@item
Think about whether it makes sense to try to implement some sort of
known region or list of "known regions", like we had before.  This would
be a region of entirely single-byte characters that we can check very
quickly. (Previously I used a range of same-width characters of any
size; but this adds extra complexity and slows down the scanning, and is
probably not worth it.) As part of the scanning process in
@code{bytecount_to_charcount()} et al, we skip over chunks of entirely
single-byte chars, so it should be easy to remember the last one.
Presumably what we should do is keep track of the largest known surrounding
entirely-single-byte region for each of the cache positions as well as
perhaps the last-cached position.  We want to be careful not to get bitten
by the previous problem of having the known region getting reset too
often.  If we implement this, we might well want to continue scanning
some distance past the desired position (maybe 300-1000 bytes) if we are
in a single-byte range so that we won't end up expanding the known range
one position at a time and entering the function each time.
@item
Think about whether it makes sense to keep the position cache sorted.
This would allow it to be larger and finer-grained in its positions.
Note that with FSF's use of markers, they were sorted, but this
was not really made good use of.  With an array, we can do binary searching
to quickly find the smallest range.  We would probably want to make use of
the gap-array code in extents.c.
@end itemize

Note that FSF's algorithm checked @strong{ALL} markers, not just the ones cached
by this algorithm.  This includes markers created by the user as well as
both ends of any overlays.  We could do similarly, and our extents could
keep both byte and character positions rather than just the former.  (But
this would probably be overkill.  We should just use our cache instead.
Any place an extent was set was surely already visited by the char<-->byte
conversion routines.)

@node Searching and Matching,  , Byte-Char Position Conversion, Text
@section Searching and Matching
@cindex searching
@cindex matching

Very incomplete, limited to a brief introduction.

People find the searching and matching code difficult to understand.
And indeed, the details are hard.  However, the basic structures are not
so complex.  First, there's a hard question with a simple answer.  What
about Mule?  The answer here is that it turns out that Mule characters
can be matched byte by byte, so neither the search code nor the regular
expression code need take much notice of it at all!  Of course, we add
some special features (such as regular expressions that match only
certain charsets), but these do not require new concepts.  The main
exception is that wild-card matches in Mule have to be careful to
swallow whole characters.  This is handled using the same basic macros
that are used for buffer and string movements.

This will also be true if a UTF-8 representation is used for the
internal encoding.

The complex algorithms for searching are for simple string searches.  In
particular, the algorithm used for fast string searching is Boyer-Moore.
This algorithm is based on the idea that if you have a mismatch at a
given position, you can precompute where to restart the search.  This
typically means that you can often make many fewer than N character
comparisons, where N is the position at which the match is found, or the
size of the text if it contains no match.  That's fast!  But it's not
easy.  You must ``compile'' the search string into a jump table.  See
the source, @file{search.c}, for more information.

Emacs changes the basic algorithms somewhat in order to handle
case-insensitive searches without a full-blown regular expression.

Regular expressions, on the other hand, have a trivial search
implementation: try a match at each position.  (Under POSIX rules, it's
a bit more complex, because POSIX requires that you find the
@emph{longest} match in the text.  This means you keep a record of the
best match so far, and find all the matches.)

The matching code for regular expressions is quite complex.  First, the
regular expression itself is compiled.  There are two basic approaches
that could be taken.  The first is to compile the expression into tables
to drive a generic finite automaton emulator.  This is the approach
given in many textbooks (Sedgewick's @emph{Algorithms} and Aho, Sethi,
and Ullmann's @emph{Compilers: Principles, Techniques, and Tools}, aka
``The Dragon Book'') as well as being used by the @file{lex} family of
lexical analysis engines.

Emacs uses a somewhat different technique.  The expression is compiled
into a form of bytecode, which is interpreted by a special interpreter.
The interpreter itself basically amounts to an inline implementation of
the finite automaton emulator.  The advantage of this technique is that
it's easier to add special features, such as control of case-sensitivity
via a global variable.

The compiler is not treated here.  See the source, @file{regex.c}.  The
interpreter, although it is divided into several functions, and looks
fearsomely complex, is actually quite simple in concept.  However,
basically what you're doing there is a strcmp on steroids, right?

@example
int
strcmp (char *p,            /* pattern pointer */
        char *b)            /* buffer pointer  */
@{
  while (*p++ == *b++)
    ;
  return *(--p) - *(--b);   /* oops, we overshot */
@}
@end example

Really, it's no harder than that.  (A bit of a white lie, OK?)

How does the regexp code generalize this?

@enumerate
@item
Depending on the pattern, @code{*b} may have a general relationship to
@code{*p}.  @emph{I.e.}, direct comparison against @code{*p} is
generalized to include checks for set membership, and context dependent
properties.  This depends on @code{&*b}.  Of course that's meaningless
in C, so we use @code{b} directly, instead.

@item
Although to ensure the algorithm terminates, @code{b} must advance step
by step, @code{p} can branch and jump.

@item
The information returned is much greater, including information about
subexpressions.
@end enumerate

We'll ignore (3).  (2) is mostly interesting when compiling the regular
expression.  Now we have

@example
@group
enum operator_t @{
  accept = 0,
  exact,
  any,
  range,
  group,       /* actually, these are probably */
  repeat,      /* turned into conditional code */
  /* etc */
@};
@end group

@group
enum status_t @{
  working = 0,
  matched,
  mismatch,
  end_of_buffer,
  error
  @};
@end group

@group
struct pattern @{
  enum operator_t operator;
  char char_value;
  boolean range_table[256];
  /* etc, etc */
  @};
@end group

@group
char *p,  /* pattern pointer */
     *b;  /* buffer pointer */

enum status_t
match (struct pattern *p, char *b)
@{
  enum status_t done = working;

  while (!(done = match_1_operator (p, b)))
    @{
      struct pattern *p1 = p;
      p = next_p (p, b);
      b = next_b (p1, b);
    @}
  return done;
@}
@end group
@end example

This format exposes the underlying finite automaton.

All of them have the following structure, except that the @samp{next_*}
functions decide where to jump (for @samp{p}) and whether or not to
increment (for @samp{b}), rather than checking for satisfaction of a
matching condition.

@example
enum status_t
match_1_operator (pattern *p, char *b)
@{
  if (! *b) return end_of_buffer;
  switch (p->operator)
    @{
    case accept:
      return matched;
    case exact:
      if (*b != p->char_value) return mismatch; else break;
    case any:
      break;
    case range:
      /* range_table is computed in the regexp_compile function */
      if (! p->range_table[*b]) return mismatch;
    /* etc, etc */
    @}
  return working;
@}
@end example

Grouping, repetition, and alternation are handled by compiling the
subexpression and calling @code{match (p->subpattern, b)} recursively.

In terms of reading the actual code, there are five optimizations
(obfuscations, if you like) that have been done.

@enumerate
@item
An explicit "failure stack" has been substituted for recursion.

@item
The @code{match_1_operator}, @code{next_p}, and @code{next_b} functions
are actually inlined into the @code{match} function for efficiency.
Then the pointer movement is interspersed with the matching operations.

@item
If the operator uses buffer context, the buffer pointer movement is
sometimes implicit in the operations retrieving the context.

@item
Some cases are combined into short preparation for individual cases, and
a "fall-through" into combined code for several cases.

@item
The @code{pattern} type is not an explicit @samp{struct}.  Instead, the
data (including, @emph{e.g.}, @samp{range_table}) is inlined into the
compiled bytecode.  This leads to bizarre code in the interpreter like

@example
case range:
  p += *(p + 1); break;
@end example

in @code{next_p}, because the compiled pattern is laid out

@example
..., 'range', count, first_8_flags, second_8_flags, ..., next_op, ...
@end example
@end enumerate

But if you keep your eye on the "switch in a loop" structure, you
should be able to understand the parts you need.

@node Multilingual Support, Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows, Text, Top
@chapter Multilingual Support
@cindex Mule character sets and encodings
@cindex character sets and encodings, Mule
@cindex encodings, Mule character sets and

@emph{NOTE}: There is a great deal of overlapping and redundant
information in this chapter.  Ben wrote introductions to Mule issues a
number of times, each time not realizing that he had already written
another introduction previously.  Hopefully, in time these will all be
integrated.

  @emph{NOTE}: The information at the top of the source file
@file{text.c} is more complete than the following, and there is also a
list of all other places to look for text/I18N-related info.  Also look in
@file{text.h} for info about the DFC and Eistring APIs.

  Recall that there are two primary ways that text is represented in
XEmacs.  The @dfn{buffer} representation sees the text as a series of
bytes (Ibytes), with a variable number of bytes used per character.
The @dfn{character} representation sees the text as a series of integers
(Ichars), one per character.  The character representation is a cleaner
representation from a theoretical standpoint, and is thus used in many
cases when lots of manipulations on a string need to be done.  However,
the buffer representation is the standard representation used in both
Lisp strings and buffers, and because of this, it is the ``default''
representation that text comes in.  The reason for using this
representation is that it's compact and is compatible with ASCII.

@menu
* Introduction to Multilingual Issues #1::  
* Introduction to Multilingual Issues #2::  
* Introduction to Multilingual Issues #3::  
* Introduction to Multilingual Issues #4::  
* Character Sets::              
* Encodings::                   
* Internal Mule Encodings::     
* Byte/Character Types; Buffer Positions; Other Typedefs::  
* Internal Text APIs::         
* Coding for Mule::             
* CCL::                         
* Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues::  
* Modules for Internationalization::  
@end menu

@node Introduction to Multilingual Issues #1, Introduction to Multilingual Issues #2, Multilingual Support, Multilingual Support
@section Introduction to Multilingual Issues #1
@cindex introduction to multilingual issues #1

There is an introduction to these issues in the Lisp Reference manual.
@xref{Internationalization Terminology,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp Reference
Manual}.  Among other documentation that may be of interest to internals
programmers is ISO-2022 (@pxref{ISO 2022,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp
Reference Manual}) and CCL (@pxref{CCL,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp Reference
Manual})

@node Introduction to Multilingual Issues #2, Introduction to Multilingual Issues #3, Introduction to Multilingual Issues #1, Multilingual Support
@section Introduction to Multilingual Issues #2
@cindex introduction to multilingual issues #2

@subheading Introduction

This document covers a number of design issues, problems and proposals
with regards to XEmacs MULE.  At first we present some definitions and
some aspects of the design that have been agreed upon.  Then we present
some issues and problems that need to be addressed, and then I include a
proposal of mine to address some of these issues.  When there are other
proposals, for example from Olivier, these will be appended to the end
of this document.

@subheading Definitions and Design Basics

First, @dfn{text} is defined to be a series of characters which together
defines an utterance or partial utterance in some language.
Generally, this language is a human language, but it may also be a
computer language if the computer language uses a representation close
enough to that of human languages for it to also make sense to call its
representation text.  Text is opposed to @dfn{binary}, which is a sequence
of bytes, representing machine-readable but not human-readable data.
A @dfn{byte} is merely a number within a predefined range, which nowadays is
nearly always zero to 255.  A @dfn{character} is a unit of text.  What makes
one character different from another is not always clear-cut.  It is
generally related to the appearance of the character, although perhaps
not any possible appearance of that character, but some sort of ideal
appearance that is assigned to a character.  Whether two characters
that look very similar are actually the same depends on various
factors such as political ones, such as whether the characters are
used to mean similar sorts of things, or behave similarly in similar
contexts.  In any case, it is not always clearly defined whether two
characters are actually the same or not.  In practice, however, this
is more or less agreed upon.

A @dfn{character set} is just that, a set of one or more characters.
The set is unique in that there will not be more than one instance of
the same character in a character set, and logically is unordered,
although an order is often imposed or suggested for the characters in
the character set.  We can also define an @dfn{order} on a character
set, which is a way of assigning a unique number, or possibly a pair of
numbers, or a triplet of numbers, or even a set of four or more numbers
to each character in the character set.  The combination of an order in
the character set results in an @dfn{ordered character set}.  In an
ordered character set, there is an upper limit and a lower limit on the
possible values that a character, or that any number within the set of
numbers assigned to a character, can take.  However, the lower limit
does not have to start at zero or one, or anywhere else in particular,
nor does the upper limit have to end anywhere particular, and there may
be gaps within these ranges such that particular numbers or sets of
numbers do not have a corresponding character, even though they are
within the upper and lower limits.  For example, @dfn{ASCII} defines a
very standard ordered character set.  It is normally defined to be 94
characters in the range 33 through 126 inclusive on both ends, with
every possible character within this range being actually present in the
character set.

Sometimes the ASCII character set is extended to include what are called
@dfn{non-printing characters}.  Non-printing characters are characters
which instead of really being displayed in a more or less rectangular
block, like all other characters, instead indicate certain functions
typically related to either control of the display upon which the
characters are being displayed, or have some effect on a communications
channel that may be currently open and transmitting characters, or may
change the meaning of future characters as they are being decoded, or
some other similar function.  You might say that non-printing characters
are somewhat of a hack because they are a special exception to the
standard concept of a character as being a printed glyph that has some
direct correspondence in the non-computer world.

With non-printing characters in mind, the 94-character ordered character
set called ASCII is often extended into a 96-character ordered character
set, also often called ASCII, which includes in addition to the 94
characters already mentioned, two non-printing characters, one called
space and assigned the number 32, just below the bottom of the previous
range, and another called @dfn{delete} or @dfn{rubout}, which is given
number 127 just above the end of the previous range.  Thus to reiterate,
the result is a 96-character ordered character set, whose characters
take the values from 32 to 127 inclusive.  Sometimes ASCII is further
extended to contain 32 more non-printing characters, which are given the
numbers zero through 31 so that the result is a 128-character ordered
character set with characters numbered zero through 127, and with many
non-printing characters.  Another way to look at this, and the way that
is normally taken by XEmacs MULE, is that the characters that would be
in the range 30 through 31 in the most extended definition of ASCII,
instead form their own ordered character set, which is called
@dfn{control zero}, and consists of 32 characters in the range zero
through 31.  A similar ordered character set called @dfn{control one} is
also created, and it contains 32 more non-printing characters in the
range 128 through 159.  Note that none of these three ordered character
sets overlaps in any of the numbers they are assigned to their
characters, so they can all be used at once.  Note further that the same
character can occur in more than one character set.  This was shown
above, for example, in two different ordered character sets we defined,
one of which we could have called @dfn{ASCII}, and the other
@dfn{ASCII-extended}, to show that it had extended by two non-printable
characters.  Most of the characters in these two character sets are
shared and present in both of them.

Note that there is no restriction on the size of the character set, or
on the numbers that are assigned to characters in an ordered character
set.  It is often extremely useful to represent a sequence of characters
as a sequence of bytes, where a byte as defined above is a number in the
range zero to 255.  An @dfn{encoding} does precisely this.  It is simply
a mapping from a sequence of characters, possibly augmented with
information indicating the character set that each of these characters
belongs to, to a sequence of bytes which represents that sequence of
characters and no other -- which is to say the mapping is reversible.

A @dfn{coding system} is a set of rules for encoding a sequence of
characters augmented with character set information into a sequence of
bytes, and later performing the reverse operation.  It is frequently
possible to group coding systems into classes or types based on common
features.  Typically, for example, a particular coding system class
may contain a base coding system which specifies some of the rules,
but leaves the rest unspecified.  Individual members of the coding
system class are formed by starting with the base coding system, and
augmenting it with additional rules to produce a particular coding
system, what you might think of as a sort of variation within a
theme.

@subheading XEmacs Specific Definitions

First of all, in XEmacs, the concept of character is a little different
from the general definition given above.  For one thing, the character
set that a character belongs to may or may not be an inherent part of
the character itself.  In other words, the same character occurring in
two different character sets may appear in XEmacs as two different
characters.  This is generally the case now, but we are attempting to
move in the other direction.  Different proposals may have different
ideas about exactly the extent to which this change will be carried out.
The general trend, though, is to represent all information about a
character other than the character itself, using text properties
attached to the character.  That way two instances of the same character
will look the same to lisp code that merely retrieves the character, and
does not also look at the text properties of that character.  Everyone
involved is in agreement in doing it this way with all Latin characters,
and in fact for all characters other than Chinese, Japanese, and Korean
ideographs.  For those, there may be a difference of opinion.

A second difference between the general definition of character and the
XEmacs usage of character is that each character is assigned a unique
number that distinguishes it from all other characters in the world, or
at the very least, from all other characters currently existing anywhere
inside the current XEmacs invocation.  (If there is a case where the
weaker statement applies, but not the stronger statement, it would
possibly be with composite characters and any other such characters that
are created on the sly.)

This unique number is called the @dfn{character representation} of the
character, and its particular details are a matter of debate.  There is
the current standard in use that it is undoubtedly going to change.
What has definitely been agreed upon is that it will be an integer, more
specifically a positive integer, represented with less than or equal to
31 bits on a 32-bit architecture, and possibly up to 63 bits on a 64-bit
architecture, with the proviso that any characters that whose
representation would fit in a 64-bit architecture, but not on a 32-bit
architecture, would be used only for composite characters, and others
that would satisfy the weak uniqueness property mentioned above, but not
with the strong uniqueness property.

At this point, it is useful to talk about the different representations
that a sequence of characters can take.  The simplest representation is
simply as a sequence of characters, and this is called the @dfn{Lisp
representation} of text, because it is the representation that Lisp
programs see.  Other representations include the external
representation, which refers to any encoding of the sequence of
characters, using the definition of encoding mentioned above.
Typically, text in the external representation is used outside of
XEmacs, for example in files, e-mail messages, web sites, and the like.
Another representation for a sequence of characters is what I will call
the @dfn{byte representation}, and it represents the way that XEmacs
internally represents text in a buffer, or in a string.  Potentially,
the representation could be different between a buffer and a string, and
then the terms @dfn{buffer byte representation} and @dfn{string byte
representation} would be used, but in practice I don't think this will
occur.  It will be possible, of course, for buffers and strings, or
particular buffers and particular strings, to contain different
sub-representations of a single representation.  For example, Olivier's
1-2-4 proposal allows for three sub-representations of his internal byte
representation, allowing for 1 byte, 2 bytes, and 4 byte width
characters respectively.  A particular string may be in one
sub-representation, and a particular buffer in another
sub-representation, but overall both are following the same byte
representation.  I do not use the term @dfn{internal representation}
here, as many people have, because it is potentially ambiguous.

Another representation is called the @dfn{array of characters
representation}.  This is a representation on the C-level in which the
sequence of text is represented, not using the byte representation, but
by using an array of characters, each represented using the character
representation.  This sort of representation is often used by redisplay
because it is more convenient to work with than any of the other
internal representations.

The term @dfn{binary representation} may also be heard.  Binary
representation is used to represent binary data.  When binary data is
represented in the lisp representation, an equivalence is simply set up
between bytes zero through 255, and characters zero through 255.  These
characters come from four character sets, which are from bottom to top,
control zero, ASCII, control 1, and Latin 1.  Together, they comprise
256 characters, and are a good mapping for the 256 possible bytes in a
binary representation.  Binary representation could also be used to
refer to an external representation of the binary data, which is a
simple direct byte-to-byte representation.  No internal representation
should ever be referred to as a binary representation because of
ambiguity.  The terms character set/encoding system were defined
generally, above.  In XEmacs, the equivalent concepts exist, although
character set has been shortened to charset, and in fact represents
specifically an ordered character set.  For each possible charset, and
for each possible coding system, there is an associated object in
XEmacs.  These objects will be of type charset and coding system,
respectively.  Charsets and coding systems are divided into classes, or
@dfn{types}, the normal term under XEmacs, and all possible charsets
encoding systems that may be defined must be in one of these types.  If
you need to create a charset or coding system that is not one of these
types, you will have to modify the C code to support this new type.
Some of the existing or soon-to-be-created types are, or will be,
generic enough so that this shouldn't be an issue.  Note also that the
byte encoding for text and the character coding of a character are
closely related.  You might say that ideally each is the simplest
equivalent of the other given the general constraints on each
representation.

To be specific, in the current MULE representation,

@enumerate
@item
Characters encode both the character itself and the character set
that it comes from.  These character sets are always assumed to be
representable as an ordered character set of size 96 or of size 96
by 96, or the trivially-related sizes 94 and 94 by 94.  The only
allowable exceptions are the control zero and control one character
sets, which are of size 32.  Character sets which do not naturally
have a compatible ordering such as this are shoehorned into an
ordered character set, or possibly two ordered character sets of a
compatible size.
@item
The variable width byte representation was deliberately chosen to
allow scanning text forwards and backwards efficiently.  This
necessitated defining the possible bytes into three ranges which
we shall call A, B, and C.  Range A is used exclusively for
single-byte characters, which is to say characters that are
representing using only one contiguous byte.  Multi-byte
characters are always represented by using one byte from Range B,
followed by one or more bytes from Range C.  What this means is
that bytes that begin a character are unequivocally distinguished
from bytes that do not begin a character, and therefore there is
never a problem scaling backwards and finding the beginning of a
character.  Know that UTF8 adopts a proposal that is very similar
in spirit in that it uses separate ranges for the first byte of a
multi byte sequence, and the following bytes in multi-byte
sequence.
@item
Given the fact that all ordered character sets allowed were
essentially 96 characters per dimension, it made perfect sense to
make Range C comprise 96 bytes.  With a little more tweaking, the
currently-standard MULE byte representation was created, and was
drafted from this.
@item
The MULE byte representation defined four basic representations for
characters, which would take up from one to four bytes,
respectively.  The MULE character representation thus had the
following constraints:
@enumerate
@item
Character numbers zero through 255 should represent the
characters that binary values zero through 255 would be
mapped onto.  (Note: this was not the case in Kenichi Handa's
version of this representation, but I changed it.)
@item
The four sub-classes of representation in the MULE byte
representation should correspond to four contiguous
non-overlapping ranges of characters.
@item
The algorithmic conversion between the single character
represented in the byte representation and in the character
representation should be as easy as possible.
@item
Given the previous constraints, the character representation
should be as compact as possible, which is to say it should
use the least number of bits possible.
@end enumerate
@end enumerate

So you see that the entire structure of the byte and character
representations stemmed from a very small number of basic choices,
which were

@enumerate
@item
the choice to encode character set information in a character
@item
the choice to assume that all character sets would have an order
imposed upon them with 96 characters per one or two
dimensions. (This is less arbitrary than it seems--it follows
ISO-2022)
@item
the choice to use a variable width byte representation.
@end enumerate

What this means is that you cannot really separate the byte
representation, the character representation, and the assumptions made
about characters and whether they represent character sets from each
other.  All of these are closely intertwined, and for purposes of
simplicity, they should be designed together.  If you change one
representation without changing another, you are in essence creating a
completely new design with its own attendant problems--since your new
design is likely to be quite complex and not very coherent with
regards to the translation between the character and byte
representations, you are likely to run into problems.

@node Introduction to Multilingual Issues #3, Introduction to Multilingual Issues #4, Introduction to Multilingual Issues #2, Multilingual Support
@section Introduction to Multilingual Issues #3
@cindex introduction to multilingual issues #3

In XEmacs, Mule is a code word for the support for input handling and
display of multi-lingual text.  This section provides an overview of how
this support impacts the C and Lisp code in XEmacs.  It is important for
anyone who works on the C or the Lisp code, especially on the C code, to
be aware of these issues, even if they don't work directly on code that
implements multi-lingual features, because there are various general
procedures that need to be followed in order to write Mule-compliant
code.  (The specifics of these procedures are documented elsewhere in
this manual.)

There are four primary aspects of Mule support:

@enumerate
@item
internal handling and representation of multi-lingual text.
@item
conversion between the internal representation of text and the various
external representations in which multi-lingual text is encoded, such as
Unicode representations (including mostly fixed width encodings such as
UCS-2/UTF-16 and UCS-4 and variable width ASCII conformant encodings,
such as UTF-7 and UTF-8); the various ISO2022 representations, which
typically use escape sequences to switch between different character
sets (such as Compound Text, used under X Windows; JIS, used
specifically for encoding Japanese; and EUC, a non-modal encoding used
for Japanese, Korean, and certain other languages); Microsoft's
multi-byte encodings (such as Shift-JIS); various simple encodings for
particular 8-bit character sets (such as Latin-1 and Latin-2, and
encodings (such as koi8 and Alternativny) for Cyrillic); and others.
This conversion needs to happen both for text in files and text sent to
or retrieved from system API calls.  It even needs to happen for
external binary data because the internal representation does not
represent binary data simply as a sequence of bytes as it is represented
externally.
@item
Proper display of multi-lingual characters.
@item
Input of multi-lingual text using the keyboard.
@end enumerate

These four aspects are for the most part independent of each other.

@subheading Characters, Character Sets, and Encodings

A @dfn{character} (which is, BTW, a surprisingly complex concept) is, in
a written representation of text, the most basic written unit that has a
meaning of its own.  It's comparable to a phoneme when analyzing words
in spoken speech (for example, the sound of @samp{t} in English, which
in fact has different pronunciations in different words -- aspirated in
@samp{time}, unaspirated in @samp{stop}, unreleased or even pronounced
as a glottal stop in @samp{button}, etc. -- but logically is a single
concept).  Like a phoneme, a character is an abstract concept defined by
its @emph{meaning}.  The character @samp{lowercase f}, for example, can
always be used to represent the first letter in the word @samp{fill},
regardless of whether it's drawn upright or italic, whether the
@samp{fi} combination is drawn as a single ligature, whether there are
serifs on the bottom of the vertical stroke, etc. (These different
appearances of a single character are often called @dfn{graphs} or
@dfn{glyphs}.) Our concern when representing text is on representing the
abstract characters, and not on their exact appearance.

A @dfn{character set} (or @dfn{charset}), as we define it, is a set of
characters, each with an associated number (or set of numbers -- see
below), called a @dfn{code point}.  It's important to understand that a
character is not defined by any number attached to it, but by its
meaning.  For example, ASCII and EBCDIC are two charsets containing
exactly the same characters (lowercase and uppercase letters, numbers 0
through 9, particular punctuation marks) but with different
numberings. The `comma' character in ASCII and EBCDIC, for instance, is
the same character despite having a different numbering.  Conversely,
when comparing ASCII and JIS-Roman, which look the same except that the
latter has a yen sign substituted for the backslash, we would say that
the backslash and yen sign are @strong{not} the same characters, despite having
the same number (95) and despite the fact that all other characters are
present in both charsets, with the same numbering.  ASCII and JIS-Roman,
then, do @emph{not} have exactly the same characters in them (ASCII has
a backslash character but no yen-sign character, and vice-versa for
JIS-Roman), unlike ASCII and EBCDIC, even though the numberings in ASCII
and JIS-Roman are closer.

It's also important to distinguish between charsets and encodings.  For
a simple charset like ASCII, there is only one encoding normally used --
each character is represented by a single byte, with the same value as
its code point.  For more complicated charsets, however, things are not
so obvious.  Unicode version 2, for example, is a large charset with
thousands of characters, each indexed by a 16-bit number, often
represented in hex, e.g. 0x05D0 for the Hebrew letter "aleph".  One
obvious encoding uses two bytes per character (actually two encodings,
depending on which of the two possible byte orderings is chosen).  This
encoding is convenient for internal processing of Unicode text; however,
it's incompatible with ASCII, so a different encoding, e.g. UTF-8, is
usually used for external text, for example files or e-mail.  UTF-8
represents Unicode characters with one to three bytes (often extended to
six bytes to handle characters with up to 31-bit indices).  Unicode
characters 00 to 7F (identical with ASCII) are directly represented with
one byte, and other characters with two or more bytes, each in the range
80 to FF.

In general, a single encoding may be able to represent more than one
charset.

@subheading Internal Representation of Text

In an ASCII or single-European-character-set world, life is very simple.
There are 256 characters, and each character is represented using the
numbers 0 through 255, which fit into a single byte.  With a few
exceptions (such as case-changing operations or syntax classes like
'whitespace'), "text" is simply an array of indices into a font.  You
can get different languages simply by choosing fonts with different
8-bit character sets (ISO-8859-1, -2, special-symbol fonts, etc.), and
everything will "just work" as long as anyone else receiving your text
uses a compatible font.

In the multi-lingual world, however, it is much more complicated.  There
are a great number of different characters which are organized in a
complex fashion into various character sets.  The representation to use
is not obvious because there are issues of size versus speed to
consider.  In fact, there are in general two kinds of representations to
work with: one that represents a single character using an integer
(possibly a byte), and the other representing a single character as a
sequence of bytes.  The former representation is normally called fixed
width, and the other variable width. Both representations represent
exactly the same characters, and the conversion from one representation
to the other is governed by a specific formula (rather than by table
lookup) but it may not be simple.  Most C code need not, and in fact
should not, know the specifics of exactly how the representations work.
In fact, the code must not make assumptions about the representations.
This means in particular that it must use the proper macros for
retrieving the character at a particular memory location, determining
how many characters are present in a particular stretch of text, and
incrementing a pointer to a particular character to point to the
following character, and so on.  It must not assume that one character
is stored using one byte, or even using any particular number of bytes.
It must not assume that the number of characters in a stretch of text
bears any particular relation to a number of bytes in that stretch.  It
must not assume that the character at a particular memory location can
be retrieved simply by dereferencing the memory location, even if a
character is known to be ASCII or is being compared with an ASCII
character, etc.  Careful coding is required to be Mule clean.  The
biggest work of adding Mule support, in fact, is converting all of the
existing code to be Mule clean.

Lisp code is mostly unaffected by these concerns.  Text in strings and
buffers appears simply as a sequence of characters regardless of
whether Mule support is present.  The biggest difference with older
versions of Emacs, as well as current versions of GNU Emacs, is that
integers and characters are no longer equivalent, but are separate
Lisp Object types.

@subheading Conversion Between Internal and External Representations

All text needs to be converted to an external representation before being
sent to a function or file, and all text retrieved from a function of
file needs to be converted to the internal representation.  This
conversion needs to happen as close to the source or destination of the
text as possible.  No operations should ever be performed on text encoded
in an external representation other than simple copying, because no
assumptions can reliably be made about the format of this text.  You
cannot assume, for example, that the end of text is terminated by a null
byte. (For example, if the text is Unicode, it will have many null bytes
in it.)  You cannot find the next "slash" character by searching through
the bytes until you find a byte that looks like a "slash" character,
because it might actually be the second byte of a Kanji character.
Furthermore, all text in the internal representation must be converted,
even if it is known to be completely ASCII, because the external
representation may not be ASCII compatible (for example, if it is
Unicode).

The place where C code needs to be the most careful is when calling
external API functions.  It is easy to forget that all text passed to or
retrieved from these functions needs to be converted.  This includes text
in structures passed to or retrieved from these functions and all text
that is passed to a callback function that is called by the system.

Macros are provided to perform conversions to or from external text.
These macros are called TO_EXTERNAL_FORMAT and TO_INTERNAL_FORMAT
respectively.  These macros accept input in various forms, for example,
Lisp strings, buffers, lstreams, raw data, and can return data in
multiple formats, including both @code{malloc()}ed and @code{alloca()}ed data.  The use
of @code{alloca()}ed data here is particularly important because, in general,
the returned data will not be used after making the API call, and as a
result, using @code{alloca()}ed data provides a very cheap and easy to use
method of allocation.

These macros take a coding system argument which indicates the nature of
the external encoding.  A coding system is an object that encapsulates
the structures of a particular external encoding and the methods required
to convert to and from this encoding.  A facility exists to create coding
system aliases, which in essence gives a single coding system two
different names.  It is effectively used in XEmacs to provide a layer of
abstraction on top of the actual coding systems.  For example, the coding
system alias "file-name" points to whichever coding system is currently
used for encoding and decoding file names as passed to or retrieved from
system calls.  In general, the actual encoding will differ from system to
system, and also on the particular locale that the user is in.  The use
of the file-name alias effectively hides that implementation detail on
top of that abstract interface layer which provides a unified set of
coding systems which are consistent across all operating environments.

The choice of which coding system to use in a particular conversion macro
requires some thought.  In general, you should choose a lower-level
actual coding system when the very design of the APIs you are working
with call for that particular coding system.  In all other cases, you
should find the least general abstract coding system (i.e. coding system
alias) that applies to your specific situation.  Only use the most
general coding systems, such as native, when there is simply nothing else
that is more appropriate.  By doing things this way, you allow the user
more control over how the encoding actually works, because the user is
free to map the abstracted coding system names onto to different actual
coding systems.

Some common coding systems are:

@table @code
@item ctext
Compound Text, which is the standard encoding under X Windows, which is
used for clipboard data and possibly other data.  (ctext is a coding
system of type ISO2022.)

@item mswindows-unicode
this is used for representing text passed to MS Window API calls with
arguments that need to be in Unicode format.  (mswindows-unicode is a
coding system of type UTF-16)

@item ms-windows-multi-byte
this is used for representing text passed to MS Windows API calls with
arguments that need to be in multi-byte format.  Note that there are
very few if any examples of such calls.

@item mswindows-tstr
this is used for representing text passed to any MS Windows API calls
that declare their argument as LPTSTR, or LPCTSTR.  This is the vast
majority of system calls and automatically translates either to
mswindows-unicode or mswindows-multi-byte, depending on the presence or
absence of the UNICODE preprocessor constant.  (If we compile XEmacs
with this preprocessor constant, then all API calls use Unicode for all
text passed to or received from these API calls.)

@item terminal
used for text sent to or read from a text terminal in the absence of a
more specific coding system (calls to window-system specific APIs should
use the appropriate window-specific coding system if it makes sense to
do so.)

@item file-name
used when specifying the names of files in the absence of a more
specific encoding, such as ms-windows-tstr.

@item native
the most general coding system for specifying text passed to system
calls.  This generally translates to whatever coding system is specified
by the current locale.  This should only be used when none of the coding
systems mentioned above are appropriate.
@end table

@subheading Proper Display of Multilingual Text

There are two things required to get this working correctly.  One is
selecting the correct font, and the other is encoding the text according
to the encoding used for that specific font, or the window-system
specific text display API.  Generally each separate character set has a
different font associated with it, which is specified by name and each
font has an associated encoding into which the characters must be
translated.  (this is the case on X Windows, at least; on Windows there
is a more general mechanism).  Both the specific font for a charset and
the encoding of that font are system dependent.  Currently there is a
way of specifying these two properties under X Windows (using the
registry and ccl properties of a character set) but not for other window
systems.  A more general system needs to be implemented to allow these
characteristics to be specified for all Windows systems.

Another issue is making sure that the necessary fonts for displaying
various character sets are installed on the system.  Currently, XEmacs
provides, on its web site, X Windows fonts for a number of different
character sets that can be installed by users.  This isn't done yet for
Windows, but it should be.

@subheading Inputting of Multilingual Text

This is a rather complicated issue because there are many paradigms
defined for inputting multi-lingual text, some of which are specific to
particular languages, and any particular language may have many
different paradigms defined for inputting its text.  These paradigms are
encoded in input methods and there is a standard API for defining an
input method in XEmacs called LEIM, or Library of Emacs Input Methods.
Some of these input methods are written entirely in Elisp, and thus are
system-independent, while others require the aid either of an external
process, or of C level support that ties into a particular
system-specific input method API, for example, XIM under X Windows, or
the active keyboard layout and IME support under Windows.  Currently,
there is no support for any system-specific input methods under
Microsoft Windows, although this will change.

@node Introduction to Multilingual Issues #4, Character Sets, Introduction to Multilingual Issues #3, Multilingual Support
@section Introduction to Multilingual Issues #4
@cindex introduction to multilingual issues #4

The rest of the sections in this chapter consist of yet another
introduction to multilingual issues, duplicating the information in the
previous sections.

@node Character Sets, Encodings, Introduction to Multilingual Issues #4, Multilingual Support
@section Character Sets
@cindex character sets

  A @dfn{character set} (or @dfn{charset}) is an ordered set of
characters.  A particular character in a charset is indexed using one or
more @dfn{position codes}, which are non-negative integers.  The number
of position codes needed to identify a particular character in a charset
is called the @dfn{dimension} of the charset.  In XEmacs/Mule, all
charsets have dimension 1 or 2, and the size of all charsets (except for
a few special cases) is either 94, 96, 94 by 94, or 96 by 96.  The range
of position codes used to index characters from any of these types of
character sets is as follows:

@example
Charset type            Position code 1         Position code 2
------------------------------------------------------------
94                      33 - 126                N/A
96                      32 - 127                N/A
94x94                   33 - 126                33 - 126
96x96                   32 - 127                32 - 127
@end example

  Note that in the above cases position codes do not start at an
expected value such as 0 or 1.  The reason for this will become clear
later.

  For example, Latin-1 is a 96-character charset, and JISX0208 (the
Japanese national character set) is a 94x94-character charset.

  [Note that, although the ranges above define the @emph{valid} position
codes for a charset, some of the slots in a particular charset may in
fact be empty.  This is the case for JISX0208, for example, where (e.g.)
all the slots whose first position code is in the range 118 - 127 are
empty.]

  There are three charsets that do not follow the above rules.  All of
them have one dimension, and have ranges of position codes as follows:

@example
Charset name            Position code 1
------------------------------------
ASCII                   0 - 127
Control-1               0 - 31
Composite               0 - some large number
@end example

  (The upper bound of the position code for composite characters has not
yet been determined, but it will probably be at least 16,383).

  ASCII is the union of two subsidiary character sets: Printing-ASCII
(the printing ASCII character set, consisting of position codes 33 -
126, like for a standard 94-character charset) and Control-ASCII (the
non-printing characters that would appear in a binary file with codes 0
- 32 and 127).

  Control-1 contains the non-printing characters that would appear in a
binary file with codes 128 - 159.

  Composite contains characters that are generated by overstriking one
or more characters from other charsets.

  Note that some characters in ASCII, and all characters in Control-1,
are @dfn{control} (non-printing) characters.  These have no printed
representation but instead control some other function of the printing
(e.g. TAB or 8 moves the current character position to the next tab
stop).  All other characters in all charsets are @dfn{graphic}
(printing) characters.

  When a binary file is read in, the bytes in the file are assigned to
character sets as follows:

@example
Bytes           Character set           Range
--------------------------------------------------
0 - 127         ASCII                   0 - 127
128 - 159       Control-1               0 - 31
160 - 255       Latin-1                 32 - 127
@end example

  This is a bit ad-hoc but gets the job done.

@node Encodings, Internal Mule Encodings, Character Sets, Multilingual Support
@section Encodings
@cindex encodings, Mule
@cindex Mule encodings

  An @dfn{encoding} is a way of numerically representing characters from
one or more character sets.  If an encoding only encompasses one
character set, then the position codes for the characters in that
character set could be used directly.  This is not possible, however, if
more than one character set is to be used in the encoding.

  For example, the conversion detailed above between bytes in a binary
file and characters is effectively an encoding that encompasses the
three character sets ASCII, Control-1, and Latin-1 in a stream of 8-bit
bytes.

  Thus, an encoding can be viewed as a way of encoding characters from a
specified group of character sets using a stream of bytes, each of which
contains a fixed number of bits (but not necessarily 8, as in the common
usage of ``byte'').

  Here are descriptions of a couple of common
encodings:

@menu
* Japanese EUC (Extended Unix Code)::  
* JIS7::                        
@end menu

@node Japanese EUC (Extended Unix Code), JIS7, Encodings, Encodings
@subsection Japanese EUC (Extended Unix Code)
@cindex Japanese EUC (Extended Unix Code)
@cindex EUC (Extended Unix Code), Japanese
@cindex Extended Unix Code, Japanese EUC

This encompasses the character sets Printing-ASCII, Katakana-JISX0201
(half-width katakana, the right half of JISX0201), Japanese-JISX0208,
and Japanese-JISX0212.

Note that Printing-ASCII and Katakana-JISX0201 are 94-character
charsets, while Japanese-JISX0208 and Japanese-JISX0212 are
94x94-character charsets.

The encoding is as follows:

@example
Character set            Representation (PC=position-code)
-------------            --------------
Printing-ASCII           PC1
Katakana-JISX0201        0x8E       | PC1 + 0x80
Japanese-JISX0208        PC1 + 0x80 | PC2 + 0x80
Japanese-JISX0212        PC1 + 0x80 | PC2 + 0x80
@end example

Note that there are other versions of EUC for other Asian languages.
EUC in general is characterized by

@enumerate
@item
row-column encoding,
@item
big-endian (row-first) ordering, and
@item
ASCII compatibility in variable width forms.
@end enumerate

@node JIS7,  , Japanese EUC (Extended Unix Code), Encodings
@subsection JIS7
@cindex JIS7

This encompasses the character sets Printing-ASCII,
Latin-JISX0201 (the left half of JISX0201; this character set
is very similar to Printing-ASCII and is a 94-character charset),
Japanese-JISX0208, and Katakana-JISX0201.  It uses 7-bit bytes.

Unlike EUC, this is a @dfn{modal} encoding, which means that there are
multiple states that the encoding can be in, which affect how the bytes
are to be interpreted.  Special sequences of bytes (called @dfn{escape
sequences}) are used to change states.

  The encoding is as follows:

@example
Character set              Representation (PC=position-code)
-------------              --------------
Printing-ASCII             PC1
Latin-JISX0201             PC1
Katakana-JISX0201          PC1
Japanese-JISX0208          PC1 | PC2


Escape sequence   ASCII equivalent   Meaning
---------------   ----------------   -------
0x1B 0x28 0x4A    ESC ( J            invoke Latin-JISX0201
0x1B 0x28 0x49    ESC ( I            invoke Katakana-JISX0201
0x1B 0x24 0x42    ESC $ B            invoke Japanese-JISX0208
0x1B 0x28 0x42    ESC ( B            invoke Printing-ASCII
@end example

  Initially, Printing-ASCII is invoked.

@node Internal Mule Encodings, Byte/Character Types; Buffer Positions; Other Typedefs, Encodings, Multilingual Support
@section Internal Mule Encodings
@cindex internal Mule encodings
@cindex Mule encodings, internal
@cindex encodings, internal Mule

In XEmacs/Mule, each character set is assigned a unique number, called a
@dfn{leading byte}.  This is used in the encodings of a character.
Leading bytes are in the range 0x80 - 0xFF (except for ASCII, which has
a leading byte of 0), although some leading bytes are reserved.

Charsets whose leading byte is in the range 0x80 - 0x9F are called
@dfn{official} and are used for built-in charsets.  Other charsets are
called @dfn{private} and have leading bytes in the range 0xA0 - 0xFF;
these are user-defined charsets.

  More specifically:

@example
Character set                Leading byte
-------------                ------------
ASCII                        0 (0x7F in arrays indexed by leading byte)
Composite                    0x8D
Dimension-1 Official         0x80 - 0x8C/0x8D
                               (0x8E is free)
Control                      0x8F
Dimension-2 Official         0x90 - 0x99
                               (0x9A - 0x9D are free)
Dimension-1 Private Marker   0x9E
Dimension-2 Private Marker   0x9F
Dimension-1 Private          0xA0 - 0xEF
Dimension-2 Private          0xF0 - 0xFF
@end example

There are two internal encodings for characters in XEmacs/Mule.  One is
called @dfn{string encoding} and is an 8-bit encoding that is used for
representing characters in a buffer or string.  It uses 1 to 4 bytes per
character.  The other is called @dfn{character encoding} and is a 19-bit
encoding that is used for representing characters individually in a
variable.

(In the following descriptions, we'll ignore composite characters for
the moment.  We also give a general (structural) overview first,
followed later by the exact details.)

@menu
* Internal String Encoding::    
* Internal Character Encoding::  
@end menu

@node Internal String Encoding, Internal Character Encoding, Internal Mule Encodings, Internal Mule Encodings
@subsection Internal String Encoding
@cindex internal string encoding
@cindex string encoding, internal
@cindex encoding, internal string

ASCII characters are encoded using their position code directly.  Other
characters are encoded using their leading byte followed by their
position code(s) with the high bit set.  Characters in private character
sets have their leading byte prefixed with a @dfn{leading byte prefix},
which is either 0x9E or 0x9F. (No character sets are ever assigned these
leading bytes.) Specifically:

@example
Character set           Encoding (PC=position-code, LB=leading-byte)
-------------           --------
ASCII                   PC-1 |
Control-1               LB   |  PC1 + 0xA0 |
Dimension-1 official    LB   |  PC1 + 0x80 |
Dimension-1 private     0x9E |  LB         | PC1 + 0x80 |
Dimension-2 official    LB   |  PC1 + 0x80 | PC2 + 0x80 |
Dimension-2 private     0x9F |  LB         | PC1 + 0x80 | PC2 + 0x80
@end example

  The basic characteristic of this encoding is that the first byte
of all characters is in the range 0x00 - 0x9F, and the second and
following bytes of all characters is in the range 0xA0 - 0xFF.
This means that it is impossible to get out of sync, or more
specifically:

@enumerate
@item
Given any byte position, the beginning of the character it is
within can be determined in constant time.
@item
Given any byte position at the beginning of a character, the
beginning of the next character can be determined in constant
time.
@item
Given any byte position at the beginning of a character, the
beginning of the previous character can be determined in constant
time.
@item
Textual searches can simply treat encoded strings as if they
were encoded in a one-byte-per-character fashion rather than
the actual multi-byte encoding.
@end enumerate

  None of the standard non-modal encodings meet all of these
conditions.  For example, EUC satisfies only (2) and (3), while
Shift-JIS and Big5 (not yet described) satisfy only (2). (All
non-modal encodings must satisfy (2), in order to be unambiguous.)

@node Internal Character Encoding,  , Internal String Encoding, Internal Mule Encodings
@subsection Internal Character Encoding
@cindex internal character encoding
@cindex character encoding, internal
@cindex encoding, internal character

  One 19-bit word represents a single character.  The word is
separated into three fields:

@example
Bit number:     18 17 16 15 14 13 12 11 10 09 08 07 06 05 04 03 02 01 00
                <------------> <------------------> <------------------>
Field:                1                  2                    3
@end example

  Note that fields 2 and 3 hold 7 bits each, while field 1 holds 5 bits.

@example
Character set           Field 1         Field 2         Field 3
-------------           -------         -------         -------
ASCII                      0               0              PC1
   range:                                                   (00 - 7F)
Control-1                  0               1              PC1
   range:                                                   (00 - 1F)
Dimension-1 official       0            LB - 0x7F         PC1
   range:                                    (01 - 0D)      (20 - 7F)
Dimension-1 private        0            LB - 0x80         PC1
   range:                                    (20 - 6F)      (20 - 7F)
Dimension-2 official    LB - 0x8F         PC1             PC2
   range:                    (01 - 0A)       (20 - 7F)      (20 - 7F)
Dimension-2 private     LB - 0xE1         PC1             PC2
   range:                    (0F - 1E)       (20 - 7F)      (20 - 7F)
Composite                 0x1F             ?               ?
@end example

Note that character codes 0 - 255 are the same as the ``binary
encoding'' described above.

Most of the code in XEmacs knows nothing of the representation of a
character other than that values 0 - 255 represent ASCII, Control 1,
and Latin 1.

@strong{WARNING WARNING WARNING}: The Boyer-Moore code in
@file{search.c}, and the code in @code{search_buffer()} that determines
whether that code can be used, knows that ``field 3'' in a character
always corresponds to the last byte in the textual representation of the
character. (This is important because the Boyer-Moore algorithm works by
looking at the last byte of the search string and &&#### finish this.

@node Byte/Character Types; Buffer Positions; Other Typedefs, Internal Text APIs, Internal Mule Encodings, Multilingual Support
@section Byte/Character Types; Buffer Positions; Other Typedefs
@cindex byte/character types; buffer positions; other typedefs
@cindex byte/character types
@cindex character types
@cindex buffer positions
@cindex typedefs, other

@menu
* Byte Types::                  
* Different Ways of Seeing Internal Text::  
* Buffer Positions::            
* Other Typedefs::              
* Usage of the Various Representations::  
* Working With the Various Representations::  
@end menu

@node Byte Types, Different Ways of Seeing Internal Text, Byte/Character Types; Buffer Positions; Other Typedefs, Byte/Character Types; Buffer Positions; Other Typedefs
@subsection Byte Types
@cindex byte types

Stuff pointed to by a char * or unsigned char * will nearly always be
one of the following types:

@itemize @minus
@item
a) [Ibyte] pointer to internally-formatted text
@item
b) [Extbyte] pointer to text in some external format, which can be
             defined as all formats other than the internal one
@item
c) [Ascbyte] pure ASCII text
@item
d) [Binbyte] binary data that is not meant to be interpreted as text
@item
e) [Rawbyte] general data in memory, where we don't care about whether
             it's text or binary
@item
f) [Boolbyte] a zero or a one
@item
g) [Bitbyte] a byte used for bit fields
@item
h) [Chbyte] null-semantics @code{char *}; used when casting an argument to
            an external API where the the other types may not be
            appropriate
@end itemize

Types (b), (c), (f) and (h) are defined as @code{char}, while the others are
@code{unsigned char}.  This is for maximum safety (signed characters are
dangerous to work with) while maintaining as much compatibility with
external APIs and string constants as possible.

We also provide versions of the above types defined with different
underlying C types, for API compatibility.  These use the following
prefixes:

@example
C = plain char, when the base type is unsigned
U = unsigned
S = signed
@end example

(Formerly I had a comment saying that type (e) "should be replaced with
void *".  However, there are in fact many places where an unsigned char
* might be used -- e.g. for ease in pointer computation, since void *
doesn't allow this, and for compatibility with external APIs.)

Note that these typedefs are purely for documentation purposes; from
the C code's perspective, they are exactly equivalent to @code{char *},
@code{unsigned char *}, etc., so you can freely use them with library
functions declared as such.

Using these more specific types rather than the general ones helps avoid
the confusions that occur when the semantics of a char * or unsigned
char * argument being studied are unclear.  Furthermore, by requiring
that ALL uses of @code{char} be replaced with some other type as part of the
Mule-ization process, we can use a search for @code{char} as a way of finding
code that has not been properly Mule-ized yet.

@node Different Ways of Seeing Internal Text, Buffer Positions, Byte Types, Byte/Character Types; Buffer Positions; Other Typedefs
@subsection Different Ways of Seeing Internal Text
@cindex different ways of seeing internal text

There are various ways of representing internal text.  The two primary
ways are as an "array" of individual characters; the other is as a
"stream" of bytes.  In the ASCII world, where there are only 255
characters at most, things are easy because each character fits into a
byte.  In general, however, this is not true -- see the above discussion
of characters vs. encodings.

In some cases, it's also important to distinguish between a stream
representation as a series of bytes and as a series of textual units.
This is particularly important wrt Unicode.  The UTF-16 representation
(sometimes referred to, rather sloppily, as simply the "Unicode" format)
represents text as a series of 16-bit units.  Mostly, each unit
corresponds to a single character, but not necessarily, as characters
outside of the range 0-65535 (the BMP or "Basic Multilingual Plane" of
Unicode) require two 16-bit units, through the mechanism of
"surrogates".  When a series of 16-bit units is serialized into a byte
stream, there are at least two possible representations, little-endian
and big-endian, and which one is used may depend on the native format of
16-bit integers in the CPU of the machine that XEmacs is running
on. (Similarly, UTF-32 is logically a representation with 32-bit textual
units.)

Specifically:

@itemize @minus
@item
UTF-8 has 1-byte (8-bit) units.
@item
UTF-16 has 2-byte (16-bit) units.
@item
UTF-32 has 4-byte (32-bit) units.
@item
XEmacs-internal encoding (the old "Mule" encoding) has 1-byte (8-bit)
units.
@item
UTF-7 technically has 7-bit units that are within the "mail-safe" range
(ASCII 32 - 126 plus a few control characters), but normally is encoded
in an 8-bit stream. (UTF-7 is also a modal encoding, since it has a
normal mode where printable ASCII characters represent themselves and a
shifted mode, introduced with a plus sign, where a base-64 encoding is
used.)
@item
UTF-5 technically has 7-bit units (normally encoded in an 8-bit stream,
like UTF-7), but only uses uppercase A-V and 0-9, and only encodes 4
bits worth of data per character.  UTF-5 is meant for encoding Unicode
inside of DNS names.
@end itemize

Thus, we can imagine three levels in the representation of texual data:

@example
series of characters -> series of textual units -> series of bytes
       [Ichar]                 [Itext]                 [Ibyte]
@end example

XEmacs has three corresponding typedefs:

@itemize @minus
@item
An Ichar is an integer (at least 32-bit), representing a 31-bit
character.
@item
An Itext is an unsigned value, either 8, 16 or 32 bits, depending
on the nature of the internal representation, and corresponding to
a single textual unit.
@item
An Ibyte is an @code{unsigned char}, representing a single byte in a
textual byte stream.
@end itemize

Internal text in stream format can be simultaneously viewed as either
@code{Itext *} or @code{Ibyte *}.  The @code{Ibyte *} representation is convenient for
copying data from one place to another, because such routines usually
expect byte counts.  However, @code{Itext *} is much better for actually
working with the data.

From a text-unit perspective, units 0 through 127 will always be ASCII
compatible, and data in Lisp strings (and other textual data generated
as a whole, e.g. from external conversion) will be followed by a
null-unit terminator.  From an @code{Ibyte *} perspective, however, the
encoding is only ASCII-compatible if it uses 1-byte units.

Similarly to the different text representations, three integral count
types exist -- Charcount, Textcount and Bytecount.

NOTE: Despite the presence of the terminator, internal text itself can
have nulls in it! (Null text units, not just the null bytes present in
any UTF-16 encoding.) The terminator is present because in many cases
internal text is passed to routines that will ultimately pass the text
to library functions that cannot handle embedded nulls, e.g. functions
manipulating filenames, and it is a real hassle to have to pass the
length around constantly.  But this can lead to sloppy coding!  We need
to be careful about watching for nulls in places that are important,
e.g. manipulating string objects or passing data to/from the clipboard.

@table @code
@item Ibyte
The data in a buffer or string is logically made up of Ibyte objects,
where a Ibyte takes up the same amount of space as a char. (It is
declared differently, though, to catch invalid usages.) Strings stored
using Ibytes are said to be in "internal format".  The important
characteristics of internal format are

@itemize @minus
@item
ASCII characters are represented as a single Ibyte, in the range 0 -
0x7f.
@item
All other characters are represented as a Ibyte in the range 0x80 - 0x9f
followed by one or more Ibytes in the range 0xa0 to 0xff.
@end itemize

This leads to a number of desirable properties:

@itemize @minus
@item
Given the position of the beginning of a character, you can find the
beginning of the next or previous character in constant time.
@item
When searching for a substring or an ASCII character within the string,
you need merely use standard searching routines.
@end itemize

@item Itext

#### Document me.

@item Ichar
This typedef represents a single Emacs character, which can be ASCII,
ISO-8859, or some extended character, as would typically be used for
Kanji.  Note that the representation of a character as an Ichar is @strong{not}
the same as the representation of that same character in a string; thus,
you cannot do the standard C trick of passing a pointer to a character
to a function that expects a string.

An Ichar takes up 19 bits of representation and (for code compatibility
and such) is compatible with an int.  This representation is visible on
the Lisp level.  The important characteristics of the Ichar
representation are

@itemize @minus
@item
values 0x00 - 0x7f represent ASCII.
@item
values 0x80 - 0xff represent the right half of ISO-8859-1.
@item
values 0x100 and up represent all other characters.
@end itemize

This means that Ichar values are upwardly compatible with the standard
8-bit representation of ASCII/ISO-8859-1.

@item Extbyte
Strings that go in or out of Emacs are in "external format", typedef'ed
as an array of char or a char *.  There is more than one external format
(JIS, EUC, etc.) but they all have similar properties.  They are modal
encodings, which is to say that the meaning of particular bytes is not
fixed but depends on what "mode" the string is currently in (e.g. bytes
in the range 0 - 0x7f might be interpreted as ASCII, or as Hiragana, or
as 2-byte Kanji, depending on the current mode).  The mode starts out in
ASCII/ISO-8859-1 and is switched using escape sequences -- for example,
in the JIS encoding, 'ESC $ B' switches to a mode where pairs of bytes
in the range 0 - 0x7f are interpreted as Kanji characters.

External-formatted data is generally desirable for passing data between
programs because it is upwardly compatible with standard
ASCII/ISO-8859-1 strings and may require less space than internal
encodings such as the one described above.  In addition, some encodings
(e.g. JIS) keep all characters (except the ESC used to switch modes) in
the printing ASCII range 0x20 - 0x7e, which results in a much higher
probability that the data will avoid being garbled in transmission.
Externally-formatted data is generally not very convenient to work with,
however, and for this reason is usually converted to internal format
before any work is done on the string.

NOTE: filenames need to be in external format so that ISO-8859-1
characters come out correctly.
@end table

@node Buffer Positions, Other Typedefs, Different Ways of Seeing Internal Text, Byte/Character Types; Buffer Positions; Other Typedefs
@subsection Buffer Positions
@cindex buffer positions

There are three possible ways to specify positions in a buffer.  All
of these are one-based: the beginning of the buffer is position or
index 1, and 0 is not a valid position.

As a "buffer position" (typedef Charbpos):

   This is an index specifying an offset in characters from the
   beginning of the buffer.  Note that buffer positions are
   logically @strong{between} characters, not on a character.  The
   difference between two buffer positions specifies the number of
   characters between those positions.  Buffer positions are the
   only kind of position externally visible to the user.

As a "byte index" (typedef Bytebpos):

   This is an index over the bytes used to represent the characters
   in the buffer.  If there is no Mule support, this is identical
   to a buffer position, because each character is represented
   using one byte.  However, with Mule support, many characters
   require two or more bytes for their representation, and so a
   byte index may be greater than the corresponding buffer
   position.

As a "memory index" (typedef Membpos):

   This is the byte index adjusted for the gap.  For positions
   before the gap, this is identical to the byte index.  For
   positions after the gap, this is the byte index plus the gap
   size.  There are two possible memory indices for the gap
   position; the memory index at the beginning of the gap should
   always be used, except in code that deals with manipulating the
   gap, where both indices may be seen.  The address of the
   character "at" (i.e. following) a particular position can be
   obtained from the formula

     buffer_start_address + memory_index(position) - 1

   except in the case of characters at the gap position.

@node Other Typedefs, Usage of the Various Representations, Buffer Positions, Byte/Character Types; Buffer Positions; Other Typedefs
@subsection Other Typedefs
@cindex other typedefs

   Charcount:
   ----------
     This typedef represents a count of characters, such as
     a character offset into a string or the number of
     characters between two positions in a buffer.  The
     difference between two Charbpos's is a Charcount, and
     character positions in a string are represented using
     a Charcount.

   Textcount:
   ----------
     #### Document me.

   Bytecount:
   ----------
     Similar to a Charcount but represents a count of bytes.
     The difference between two Bytebpos's is a Bytecount.


@node Usage of the Various Representations, Working With the Various Representations, Other Typedefs, Byte/Character Types; Buffer Positions; Other Typedefs
@subsection Usage of the Various Representations
@cindex usage of the various representations

Memory indices are used in low-level functions in insdel.c and for
extent endpoints and marker positions.  The reason for this is that
this way, the extents and markers don't need to be updated for most
insertions, which merely shrink the gap and don't move any
characters around in memory.

(The beginning-of-gap memory index simplifies insertions w.r.t.
markers, because text usually gets inserted after markers.  For
extents, it is merely for consistency, because text can get
inserted either before or after an extent's endpoint depending on
the open/closedness of the endpoint.)

Byte indices are used in other code that needs to be fast,
such as the searching, redisplay, and extent-manipulation code.

Buffer positions are used in all other code.  This is because this
representation is easiest to work with (especially since Lisp
code always uses buffer positions), necessitates the fewest
changes to existing code, and is the safest (e.g. if the text gets
shifted underneath a buffer position, it will still point to a
character; if text is shifted under a byte index, it might point
to the middle of a character, which would be bad).

Similarly, Charcounts are used in all code that deals with strings
except for code that needs to be fast, which used Bytecounts.

Strings are always passed around internally using internal format.
Conversions between external format are performed at the time
that the data goes in or out of Emacs.

@node Working With the Various Representations,  , Usage of the Various Representations, Byte/Character Types; Buffer Positions; Other Typedefs
@subsection Working With the Various Representations
@cindex working with the various representations

We write things this way because it's very important the
MAX_BYTEBPOS_GAP_SIZE_3 is a multiple of 3. (As it happens,
65535 is a multiple of 3, but this may not always be the
case. #### unfinished

@node Internal Text APIs, Coding for Mule, Byte/Character Types; Buffer Positions; Other Typedefs, Multilingual Support
@section Internal Text APIs
@cindex internal text APIs
@cindex text APIs, internal
@cindex APIs, text, internal

@strong{NOTE}: The most current documentation for these APIs is in
@file{text.h}.  In case of error, assume that file is correct and this
one wrong.

@menu
* Basic internal-format APIs::  
* The DFC API::                 
* The Eistring API::            
@end menu

@node Basic internal-format APIs, The DFC API, Internal Text APIs, Internal Text APIs
@subsection Basic internal-format APIs
@cindex basic internal-format APIs
@cindex internal-format APIs, basic
@cindex APIs, basic internal-format

These are simple functions and macros to convert between text
representation and characters, move forward and back in text, etc.

#### Finish the rest of this.

Use the following functions/macros on contiguous text in any of the
internal formats.  Those that take a format arg work on all internal
formats; the others work only on the default (variable-width under Mule)
format.  If the text you're operating on is known to come from a buffer,
use the buffer-level functions in buffer.h, which automatically know the
correct format and handle the gap.

Some terminology:

"itext" appearing in the macros means "internal-format text" -- type
@code{Ibyte *}.  Operations on such pointers themselves, rather than on the
text being pointed to, have "itext" instead of "itext" in the macro
name.  "ichar" in the macro names means an Ichar -- the representation
of a character as a single integer rather than a series of bytes, as part
of "itext".  Many of the macros below are for converting between the
two representations of characters.

Note also that we try to consistently distinguish between an "Ichar" and
a Lisp character.  Stuff working with Lisp characters often just says
"char", so we consistently use "Ichar" when that's what we're working
with.

@node The DFC API, The Eistring API, Basic internal-format APIs, Internal Text APIs
@subsection The DFC API
@cindex DFC API
@cindex API, DFC

This is for conversion between internal and external text.  Note that
there is also the "new DFC" API, which @strong{returns} a pointer to the
converted text (in alloca space), rather than storing it into a
variable.

The macros below are used for converting data between different formats.
Generally, the data is textual, and the formats are related to
internationalization (e.g. converting between internal-format text and
UTF-8) -- but the mechanism is general, and could be used for anything,
e.g. decoding gzipped data.

In general, conversion involves a source of data, a sink, the existing
format of the source data, and the desired format of the sink.  The
macros below, however, always require that either the source or sink is
internal-format text.  Therefore, in practice the conversions below
involve source, sink, an external format (specified by a coding system),
and the direction of conversion (internal->external or vice-versa).

Sources and sinks can be raw data (sized or unsized -- when unsized,
input data is assumed to be null-terminated [double null-terminated for
Unicode-format data], and on output the length is not stored anywhere),
Lisp strings, Lisp buffers, lstreams, and opaque data objects.  When the
output is raw data, the result can be allocated either with @code{alloca()} or
@code{malloc()}. (There is currently no provision for writing into a fixed
buffer.  If you want this, use @code{alloca()} output and then copy the data --
but be careful with the size!  Unless you are very sure of the encoding
being used, upper bounds for the size are not in general computable.)
The obvious restrictions on source and sink types apply (e.g. Lisp
strings are a source and sink only for internal data).

All raw data outputted will contain an extra null byte (two bytes for
Unicode -- currently, in fact, all output data, whether internal or
external, is double-null-terminated, but you can't count on this; see
below).  This means that enough space is allocated to contain the extra
nulls; however, these nulls are not reflected in the returned output
size.

The most basic macros are TO_EXTERNAL_FORMAT and TO_INTERNAL_FORMAT.
These can be used to convert between any kinds of sources or sinks.
However, 99% of conversions involve raw data or Lisp strings as both
source and sink, and usually data is output as @code{alloca()} rather than
@code{malloc()}.  For this reason, convenience macros are defined for many types
of conversions involving raw data and/or Lisp strings, especially when
the output is an @code{alloca()}ed string. (When the destination is a
Lisp_String, there are other functions that should be used instead --
@code{build_ext_string()} and @code{make_ext_string()}, for example.) The convenience
macros are of two types -- the older kind that store the result into a
specified variable, and the newer kind that return the result.  The newer
kind of macros don't exist when the output is sized data, because that
would have two return values.  NOTE: All convenience macros are
ultimately defined in terms of TO_EXTERNAL_FORMAT and TO_INTERNAL_FORMAT.
Thus, any comments below about the workings of these macros also apply to
all convenience macros.

@example
TO_EXTERNAL_FORMAT (source_type, source, sink_type, sink, codesys)
TO_INTERNAL_FORMAT (source_type, source, sink_type, sink, codesys)
@end example

Typical use is

@example
   TO_EXTERNAL_FORMAT (LISP_STRING, str, C_STRING_MALLOC, ptr, Qfile_name);
@end example

which means that the contents of the lisp string @var{str} are written
to a malloc'ed memory area which will be pointed to by @var{ptr}, after the
function returns.  The conversion will be done using the @code{file-name}
coding system (which will be controlled by the user indirectly by
setting or binding the variable @code{file-name-coding-system}).

Some sources and sinks require two C variables to specify.  We use
some preprocessor magic to allow different source and sink types, and
even different numbers of arguments to specify different types of
sources and sinks.

So we can have a call that looks like

@example
   TO_INTERNAL_FORMAT (DATA, (ptr, len),
                       MALLOC, (ptr, len),
                       coding_system);
@end example

The parenthesized argument pairs are required to make the
preprocessor magic work.

NOTE: GC is inhibited during the entire operation of these macros.  This
is because frequently the data to be converted comes from strings but
gets passed in as just DATA, and GC may move around the string data.  If
we didn't inhibit GC, there'd have to be a lot of messy recoding,
alloca-copying of strings and other annoying stuff.
      	      
The source or sink can be specified in one of these ways:

@example
DATA,   (ptr, len),    // input data is a fixed buffer of size len
ALLOCA, (ptr, len),    // output data is in a @code{ALLOCA()}ed buffer of size len
MALLOC, (ptr, len),    // output data is in a @code{malloc()}ed buffer of size len
C_STRING_ALLOCA, ptr,  // equivalent to ALLOCA (ptr, len_ignored) on output
C_STRING_MALLOC, ptr,  // equivalent to MALLOC (ptr, len_ignored) on output
C_STRING,     ptr,     // equivalent to DATA, (ptr, strlen/wcslen (ptr))
                       // on input (the Unicode version is used when correct)
LISP_STRING,  string,  // input or output is a Lisp_Object of type string
LISP_BUFFER,  buffer,  // output is written to (point) in lisp buffer
LISP_LSTREAM, lstream, // input or output is a Lisp_Object of type lstream
LISP_OPAQUE,  object,  // input or output is a Lisp_Object of type opaque
@end example

When specifying the sink, use lvalues, since the macro will assign to them,
except when the sink is an lstream or a lisp buffer.

For the sink types @code{ALLOCA} and @code{C_STRING_ALLOCA}, the resulting text is
stored in a stack-allocated buffer, which is automatically freed on
returning from the function.  However, the sink types @code{MALLOC} and
@code{C_STRING_MALLOC} return @code{xmalloc()}ed memory.  The caller is responsible
for freeing this memory using @code{xfree()}.

The macros accept the kinds of sources and sinks appropriate for
internal and external data representation.  See the type_checking_assert
macros below for the actual allowed types.

Since some sources and sinks use one argument (a Lisp_Object) to
specify them, while others take a (pointer, length) pair, we use
some C preprocessor trickery to allow pair arguments to be specified
by parenthesizing them, as in the examples above.

Anything prefixed by dfc_ (`data format conversion') is private.
They are only used to implement these macros.

[[Using C_STRING* is appropriate for using with external APIs that
take null-terminated strings.  For internal data, we should try to
be '\0'-clean - i.e. allow arbitrary data to contain embedded '\0'.

Sometime in the future we might allow output to C_STRING_ALLOCA or
C_STRING_MALLOC _only_ with @code{TO_EXTERNAL_FORMAT()}, not
@code{TO_INTERNAL_FORMAT()}.]]

The above comments are not true.  Frequently (most of the time, in
fact), external strings come as zero-terminated entities, where the
zero-termination is the only way to find out the length.  Even in
cases where you can get the length, most of the time the system will
still use the null to signal the end of the string, and there will
still be no way to either send in or receive a string with embedded
nulls.  In such situations, it's pointless to track the length
because null bytes can never be in the string.  We have a lot of
operations that make it easy to operate on zero-terminated strings,
and forcing the user the deal with the length everywhere would only
make the code uglier and more complicated, for no gain. --ben

There is no problem using the same lvalue for source and sink.

Also, when pointers are required, the code (currently at least) is
lax and allows any pointer types, either in the source or the sink.
This makes it possible, e.g., to deal with internal format data held
in char *'s or external format data held in WCHAR * (i.e. Unicode).

Finally, whenever storage allocation is called for, extra space is
allocated for a terminating zero, and such a zero is stored in the
appropriate place, regardless of whether the source data was
specified using a length or was specified as zero-terminated.  This
allows you to freely pass the resulting data, no matter how
obtained, to a routine that expects zero termination (modulo, of
course, that any embedded zeros in the resulting text will cause
truncation).  In fact, currently two embedded zeros are allocated
and stored after the data result.  This is to allow for the
possibility of storing a Unicode value on output, which needs the
two zeros.  Currently, however, the two zeros are stored regardless
of whether the conversion is internal or external and regardless of
whether the external coding system is in fact Unicode.  This
behavior may change in the future, and you cannot rely on this --
the most you can rely on is that sink data in Unicode format will
have two terminating nulls, which combine to form one Unicode null
character.

NOTE: You might ask, why are these not written as functions that
@strong{RETURN} the converted string, since that would allow them to be used
much more conveniently, without having to constantly declare temporary
variables?  The answer is that in fact I originally did write the
routines that way, but that required either

@itemize @bullet
@item
(a) calling @code{alloca()} inside of a function call, or
@item
(b) using expressions separated by commas and a global temporary variable, or
@item
(c) using the GCC extension (@{ ... @}).
@end itemize

Turned out that all of the above had bugs, all caused by GCC (hence the
comments about "those GCC wankers" and "ream gcc up the ass").  As for
(a), some versions of GCC (especially on Intel platforms), which had
buggy implementations of @code{alloca()} that couldn't handle being called
inside of a function call -- they just decremented the stack right in the
middle of pushing args.  Oops, crash with stack trashing, very bad.  (b)
was an attempt to fix (a), and that led to further GCC crashes, esp. when
you had two such calls in a single subexpression, because GCC couldn't be
counted upon to follow even a minimally reasonable order of execution.
True, you can't count on one argument being evaluated before another, but
GCC would actually interleave them so that the temp var got stomped on by
one while the other was accessing it.  So I tried (c), which was
problematic because that GCC extension has more bugs in it than a
termite's nest.

So reluctantly I converted to the current way.  Now, that was awhile ago
(c. 1994), and it appears that the bug involving alloca in function calls
has long since been fixed.  More recently, I defined the new-dfc routines
down below, which DO allow exactly such convenience of returning your
args rather than store them in temp variables, and I also wrote a
configure check to see whether @code{alloca()} causes crashes inside of function
calls, and if so use the portable @code{alloca()} implementation in alloca.c.
If you define TEST_NEW_DFC, the old routines get written in terms of the
new ones, and I've had a beta put out with this on and it appeared to
this appears to cause no problems -- so we should consider
switching, and feel no compunctions about writing further such function-
like @code{alloca()} routines in lieu of statement-like ones. --ben

@node The Eistring API,  , The DFC API, Internal Text APIs
@subsection The Eistring API
@cindex Eistring API
@cindex API, Eistring

(This API is currently under-used) When doing simple things with
internal text, the basic internal-format APIs are enough.  But to do
things like delete or replace a substring, concatenate various strings,
etc. is difficult to do cleanly because of the allocation issues.
The Eistring API is designed to deal with this, and provides a clean
way of modifying and building up internal text. (Note that the former
lack of this API has meant that some code uses Lisp strings to do
similar manipulations, resulting in excess garbage and increased
garbage collection.)

NOTE: The Eistring API is (or should be) Mule-correct even without
an ASCII-compatible internal representation.

@example
#### NOTE: This is a work in progress.  Neither the API nor especially
the implementation is finished.

NOTE: An Eistring is a structure that makes it easy to work with
internally-formatted strings of data.  It provides operations similar
in feel to the standard @code{strcpy()}, @code{strcat()}, @code{strlen()}, etc., but

(a) it is Mule-correct
(b) it does dynamic allocation so you never have to worry about size
    restrictions
(c) it comes in an @code{ALLOCA()} variety (all allocation is stack-local,
    so there is no need to explicitly clean up) as well as a @code{malloc()}
    variety
(d) it knows its own length, so it does not suffer from standard null
    byte brain-damage -- but it null-terminates the data anyway, so
    it can be passed to standard routines
(e) it provides a much more powerful set of operations and knows about
    all the standard places where string data might reside: Lisp_Objects,
    other Eistrings, Ibyte * data with or without an explicit length,
    ASCII strings, Ichars, etc.
(f) it provides easy operations to convert to/from externally-formatted
    data, and is easier to use than the standard TO_INTERNAL_FORMAT
    and TO_EXTERNAL_FORMAT macros. (An Eistring can store both the internal
    and external version of its data, but the external version is only
    initialized or changed when you call @code{eito_external()}.)

The idea is to make it as easy to write Mule-correct string manipulation
code as it is to write normal string manipulation code.  We also make
the API sufficiently general that it can handle multiple internal data
formats (e.g. some fixed-width optimizing formats and a default variable
width format) and allows for @strong{ANY} data format we might choose in the
future for the default format, including UCS2. (In other words, we can't
assume that the internal format is ASCII-compatible and we can't assume
it doesn't have embedded null bytes.  We do assume, however, that any
chosen format will have the concept of null-termination.) All of this is
hidden from the user.

#### It is really too bad that we don't have a real object-oriented
language, or at least a language with polymorphism!


 ********************************************** 
 *                 Declaration                * 
 ********************************************** 

To declare an Eistring, either put one of the following in the local
variable section:

DECLARE_EISTRING (name);
     Declare a new Eistring and initialize it to the empy string.  This
     is a standard local variable declaration and can go anywhere in the
     variable declaration section.  NAME itself is declared as an
     Eistring *, and its storage declared on the stack.

DECLARE_EISTRING_MALLOC (name);
     Declare and initialize a new Eistring, which uses @code{malloc()}ed
     instead of @code{ALLOCA()}ed data.  This is a standard local variable
     declaration and can go anywhere in the variable declaration
     section.  Once you initialize the Eistring, you will have to free
     it using @code{eifree()} to avoid memory leaks.  You will need to use this
     form if you are passing an Eistring to any function that modifies
     it (otherwise, the modified data may be in stack space and get
     overwritten when the function returns).

or use

Eistring ei;
void eiinit (Eistring *ei);
void eiinit_malloc (Eistring *einame);
     If you need to put an Eistring elsewhere than in a local variable
     declaration (e.g. in a structure), declare it as shown and then
     call one of the init macros.

Also note:

void eifree (Eistring *ei);
     If you declared an Eistring to use @code{malloc()} to hold its data,
     or converted it to the heap using @code{eito_malloc()}, then this
     releases any data in it and afterwards resets the Eistring
     using @code{eiinit_malloc()}.  Otherwise, it just resets the Eistring
     using @code{eiinit()}.


 ********************************************** 
 *                 Conventions                * 
 ********************************************** 

 - The names of the functions have been chosen, where possible, to
   match the names of @code{str*()} functions in the standard C API.
 - 


 ********************************************** 
 *               Initialization               * 
 ********************************************** 

void eireset (Eistring *eistr);
     Initialize the Eistring to the empty string.

void eicpy_* (Eistring *eistr, ...);
     Initialize the Eistring from somewhere:

void eicpy_ei (Eistring *eistr, Eistring *eistr2);
     ... from another Eistring.
void eicpy_lstr (Eistring *eistr, Lisp_Object lisp_string);
     ... from a Lisp_Object string.
void eicpy_ch (Eistring *eistr, Ichar ch);
     ... from an Ichar (this can be a conventional C character).

void eicpy_lstr_off (Eistring *eistr, Lisp_Object lisp_string,
                     Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
                     Bytecount len, Charcount charlen);
     ... from a section of a Lisp_Object string.
void eicpy_lbuf (Eistring *eistr, Lisp_Object lisp_buf,
     	    Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
     	    Bytecount len, Charcount charlen);
     ... from a section of a Lisp_Object buffer.
void eicpy_raw (Eistring *eistr, const Ibyte *data, Bytecount len);
     ... from raw internal-format data in the default internal format.
void eicpy_rawz (Eistring *eistr, const Ibyte *data);
     ... from raw internal-format data in the default internal format
     that is "null-terminated" (the meaning of this depends on the nature
     of the default internal format).
void eicpy_raw_fmt (Eistring *eistr, const Ibyte *data, Bytecount len,
                    Internal_Format intfmt, Lisp_Object object);
     ... from raw internal-format data in the specified format.
void eicpy_rawz_fmt (Eistring *eistr, const Ibyte *data,
                     Internal_Format intfmt, Lisp_Object object);
     ... from raw internal-format data in the specified format that is
     "null-terminated" (the meaning of this depends on the nature of
     the specific format).
void eicpy_c (Eistring *eistr, const Ascbyte *c_string);
     ... from an ASCII null-terminated string.  Non-ASCII characters in
     the string are @strong{ILLEGAL} (read @code{abort()} with error-checking defined).
void eicpy_c_len (Eistring *eistr, const Ascbyte *c_string, len);
     ... from an ASCII string, with length specified.  Non-ASCII characters
     in the string are @strong{ILLEGAL} (read @code{abort()} with error-checking defined).
void eicpy_ext (Eistring *eistr, const Extbyte *extdata,
                Lisp_Object codesys);
     ... from external null-terminated data, with coding system specified.
void eicpy_ext_len (Eistring *eistr, const Extbyte *extdata,
                    Bytecount extlen, Lisp_Object codesys);
     ... from external data, with length and coding system specified.
void eicpy_lstream (Eistring *eistr, Lisp_Object lstream);
     ... from an lstream; reads data till eof.  Data must be in default
     internal format; otherwise, interpose a decoding lstream.


 ********************************************** 
 *    Getting the data out of the Eistring    * 
 ********************************************** 

Ibyte *eidata (Eistring *eistr);
     Return a pointer to the raw data in an Eistring.  This is NOT
     a copy.

Lisp_Object eimake_string (Eistring *eistr);
     Make a Lisp string out of the Eistring.

Lisp_Object eimake_string_off (Eistring *eistr,
                               Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
     			  Bytecount len, Charcount charlen);
     Make a Lisp string out of a section of the Eistring.

void eicpyout_alloca (Eistring *eistr, LVALUE: Ibyte *ptr_out,
                      LVALUE: Bytecount len_out);
     Make an @code{ALLOCA()} copy of the data in the Eistring, using the
     default internal format.  Due to the nature of @code{ALLOCA()}, this
     must be a macro, with all lvalues passed in as parameters.
     (More specifically, not all compilers correctly handle using
     @code{ALLOCA()} as the argument to a function call -- GCC on x86
     didn't used to, for example.) A pointer to the @code{ALLOCA()}ed data
     is stored in PTR_OUT, and the length of the data (not including
     the terminating zero) is stored in LEN_OUT.

void eicpyout_alloca_fmt (Eistring *eistr, LVALUE: Ibyte *ptr_out,
                          LVALUE: Bytecount len_out,
                          Internal_Format intfmt, Lisp_Object object);
     Like @code{eicpyout_alloca()}, but converts to the specified internal
     format. (No formats other than FORMAT_DEFAULT are currently
     implemented, and you get an assertion failure if you try.)

Ibyte *eicpyout_malloc (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount *intlen_out);
     Make a @code{malloc()} copy of the data in the Eistring, using the
     default internal format.  This is a real function.  No lvalues
     passed in.  Returns the new data, and stores the length (not
     including the terminating zero) using INTLEN_OUT, unless it's
     a NULL pointer.

Ibyte *eicpyout_malloc_fmt (Eistring *eistr, Internal_Format intfmt,
                              Bytecount *intlen_out, Lisp_Object object);
     Like @code{eicpyout_malloc()}, but converts to the specified internal
     format. (No formats other than FORMAT_DEFAULT are currently
     implemented, and you get an assertion failure if you try.)


 ********************************************** 
 *             Moving to the heap             * 
 ********************************************** 

void eito_malloc (Eistring *eistr);
     Move this Eistring to the heap.  Its data will be stored in a
     @code{malloc()}ed block rather than the stack.  Subsequent changes to
     this Eistring will @code{realloc()} the block as necessary.  Use this
     when you want the Eistring to remain in scope past the end of
     this function call.  You will have to manually free the data
     in the Eistring using @code{eifree()}.

void eito_alloca (Eistring *eistr);
     Move this Eistring back to the stack, if it was moved to the
     heap with @code{eito_malloc()}.  This will automatically free any
     heap-allocated data.



 ********************************************** 
 *            Retrieving the length           * 
 ********************************************** 

Bytecount eilen (Eistring *eistr);
     Return the length of the internal data, in bytes.  See also
     @code{eiextlen()}, below.
Charcount eicharlen (Eistring *eistr);
     Return the length of the internal data, in characters.


 ********************************************** 
 *           Working with positions           * 
 ********************************************** 

Bytecount eicharpos_to_bytepos (Eistring *eistr, Charcount charpos);
     Convert a char offset to a byte offset.
Charcount eibytepos_to_charpos (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount bytepos);
     Convert a byte offset to a char offset.
Bytecount eiincpos (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount bytepos);
     Increment the given position by one character.
Bytecount eiincpos_n (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount bytepos, Charcount n);
     Increment the given position by N characters.
Bytecount eidecpos (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount bytepos);
     Decrement the given position by one character.
Bytecount eidecpos_n (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount bytepos, Charcount n);
     Deccrement the given position by N characters.


 ********************************************** 
 *    Getting the character at a position     * 
 ********************************************** 

Ichar eigetch (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount bytepos);
     Return the character at a particular byte offset.
Ichar eigetch_char (Eistring *eistr, Charcount charpos);
     Return the character at a particular character offset.


 ********************************************** 
 *    Setting the character at a position     * 
 ********************************************** 

Ichar eisetch (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount bytepos, Ichar chr);
     Set the character at a particular byte offset.
Ichar eisetch_char (Eistring *eistr, Charcount charpos, Ichar chr);
     Set the character at a particular character offset.


 ********************************************** 
 *               Concatenation                * 
 ********************************************** 

void eicat_* (Eistring *eistr, ...);
     Concatenate onto the end of the Eistring, with data coming from the
     same places as above:

void eicat_ei (Eistring *eistr, Eistring *eistr2);
     ... from another Eistring.
void eicat_c (Eistring *eistr, Ascbyte *c_string);
     ... from an ASCII null-terminated string.  Non-ASCII characters in
     the string are @strong{ILLEGAL} (read @code{abort()} with error-checking defined).
void eicat_raw (ei, const Ibyte *data, Bytecount len);
     ... from raw internal-format data in the default internal format.
void eicat_rawz (ei, const Ibyte *data);
     ... from raw internal-format data in the default internal format
     that is "null-terminated" (the meaning of this depends on the nature
     of the default internal format).
void eicat_lstr (ei, Lisp_Object lisp_string);
     ... from a Lisp_Object string.
void eicat_ch (ei, Ichar ch);
     ... from an Ichar.

All except the first variety are convenience functions.
n the general case, create another Eistring from the source.)


 ********************************************** 
 *                Replacement                 * 
 ********************************************** 

void eisub_* (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
     			  Bytecount len, Charcount charlen, ...);
     Replace a section of the Eistring, specifically:

void eisub_ei (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
     	  Bytecount len, Charcount charlen, Eistring *eistr2);
     ... with another Eistring.
void eisub_c (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
     	 Bytecount len, Charcount charlen, Ascbyte *c_string);
     ... with an ASCII null-terminated string.  Non-ASCII characters in
     the string are @strong{ILLEGAL} (read @code{abort()} with error-checking defined).
void eisub_ch (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
     	  Bytecount len, Charcount charlen, Ichar ch);
     ... with an Ichar.

void eidel (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
            Bytecount len, Charcount charlen);
     Delete a section of the Eistring.


 ********************************************** 
 *      Converting to an external format      * 
 ********************************************** 

void eito_external (Eistring *eistr, Lisp_Object codesys);
     Convert the Eistring to an external format and store the result
     in the string.  NOTE: Further changes to the Eistring will @strong{NOT}
     change the external data stored in the string.  You will have to
     call @code{eito_external()} again in such a case if you want the external
     data.

Extbyte *eiextdata (Eistring *eistr);
     Return a pointer to the external data stored in the Eistring as
     a result of a prior call to @code{eito_external()}.

Bytecount eiextlen (Eistring *eistr);
     Return the length in bytes of the external data stored in the
     Eistring as a result of a prior call to @code{eito_external()}.


 ********************************************** 
 * Searching in the Eistring for a character  * 
 ********************************************** 

Bytecount eichr (Eistring *eistr, Ichar chr);
Charcount eichr_char (Eistring *eistr, Ichar chr);
Bytecount eichr_off (Eistring *eistr, Ichar chr, Bytecount off,
     		Charcount charoff);
Charcount eichr_off_char (Eistring *eistr, Ichar chr, Bytecount off,
     		     Charcount charoff);
Bytecount eirchr (Eistring *eistr, Ichar chr);
Charcount eirchr_char (Eistring *eistr, Ichar chr);
Bytecount eirchr_off (Eistring *eistr, Ichar chr, Bytecount off,
     		 Charcount charoff);
Charcount eirchr_off_char (Eistring *eistr, Ichar chr, Bytecount off,
     		      Charcount charoff);


 ********************************************** 
 *   Searching in the Eistring for a string   * 
 ********************************************** 

Bytecount eistr_ei (Eistring *eistr, Eistring *eistr2);
Charcount eistr_ei_char (Eistring *eistr, Eistring *eistr2);
Bytecount eistr_ei_off (Eistring *eistr, Eistring *eistr2, Bytecount off,
     		   Charcount charoff);
Charcount eistr_ei_off_char (Eistring *eistr, Eistring *eistr2,
     			Bytecount off, Charcount charoff);
Bytecount eirstr_ei (Eistring *eistr, Eistring *eistr2);
Charcount eirstr_ei_char (Eistring *eistr, Eistring *eistr2);
Bytecount eirstr_ei_off (Eistring *eistr, Eistring *eistr2, Bytecount off,
     		    Charcount charoff);
Charcount eirstr_ei_off_char (Eistring *eistr, Eistring *eistr2,
     			 Bytecount off, Charcount charoff);

Bytecount eistr_c (Eistring *eistr, Ascbyte *c_string);
Charcount eistr_c_char (Eistring *eistr, Ascbyte *c_string);
Bytecount eistr_c_off (Eistring *eistr, Ascbyte *c_string, Bytecount off,
     		   Charcount charoff);
Charcount eistr_c_off_char (Eistring *eistr, Ascbyte *c_string,
     		       Bytecount off, Charcount charoff);
Bytecount eirstr_c (Eistring *eistr, Ascbyte *c_string);
Charcount eirstr_c_char (Eistring *eistr, Ascbyte *c_string);
Bytecount eirstr_c_off (Eistring *eistr, Ascbyte *c_string,
     		   Bytecount off, Charcount charoff);
Charcount eirstr_c_off_char (Eistring *eistr, Ascbyte *c_string,
     			Bytecount off, Charcount charoff);


 ********************************************** 
 *                 Comparison                 * 
 ********************************************** 

int eicmp_* (Eistring *eistr, ...);
int eicmp_off_* (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
                 Bytecount len, Charcount charlen, ...);
int eicasecmp_* (Eistring *eistr, ...);
int eicasecmp_off_* (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
                     Bytecount len, Charcount charlen, ...);
int eicasecmp_i18n_* (Eistring *eistr, ...);
int eicasecmp_i18n_off_* (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
                          Bytecount len, Charcount charlen, ...);

     Compare the Eistring with the other data.  Return value same as
     from strcmp.  The @code{*} is either @code{ei} for another Eistring (in
     which case @code{...} is an Eistring), or @code{c} for a pure-ASCII string
     (in which case @code{...} is a pointer to that string).  For anything
     more complex, first create an Eistring out of the source.
     Comparison is either simple (@code{eicmp_...}), ASCII case-folding
     (@code{eicasecmp_...}), or multilingual case-folding
     (@code{eicasecmp_i18n_...}).


More specifically, the prototypes are:

int eicmp_ei (Eistring *eistr, Eistring *eistr2);
int eicmp_off_ei (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
                  Bytecount len, Charcount charlen, Eistring *eistr2);
int eicasecmp_ei (Eistring *eistr, Eistring *eistr2);
int eicasecmp_off_ei (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
                      Bytecount len, Charcount charlen, Eistring *eistr2);
int eicasecmp_i18n_ei (Eistring *eistr, Eistring *eistr2);
int eicasecmp_i18n_off_ei (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount off,
     		      Charcount charoff, Bytecount len,
     		      Charcount charlen, Eistring *eistr2);

int eicmp_c (Eistring *eistr, Ascbyte *c_string);
int eicmp_off_c (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
                 Bytecount len, Charcount charlen, Ascbyte *c_string);
int eicasecmp_c (Eistring *eistr, Ascbyte *c_string);
int eicasecmp_off_c (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
                     Bytecount len, Charcount charlen,
                     Ascbyte *c_string);
int eicasecmp_i18n_c (Eistring *eistr, Ascbyte *c_string);
int eicasecmp_i18n_off_c (Eistring *eistr, Bytecount off, Charcount charoff,
                          Bytecount len, Charcount charlen,
                          Ascbyte *c_string);


 ********************************************** 
 *         Case-changing the Eistring         * 
 ********************************************** 

void eilwr (Eistring *eistr);
     Convert all characters in the Eistring to lowercase.
void eiupr (Eistring *eistr);
     Convert all characters in the Eistring to uppercase.
@end example

@node Coding for Mule, CCL, Internal Text APIs, Multilingual Support
@section Coding for Mule
@cindex coding for Mule
@cindex Mule, coding for

Although Mule support is not compiled by default in XEmacs, many people
are using it, and we consider it crucial that new code works correctly
with multibyte characters.  This is not hard; it is only a matter of
following several simple user-interface guidelines.  Even if you never
compile with Mule, with a little practice you will find it quite easy
to code Mule-correctly.

Note that these guidelines are not necessarily tied to the current Mule
implementation; they are also a good idea to follow on the grounds of
code generalization for future I18N work.

@menu
* Character-Related Data Types::  
* Working With Character and Byte Positions::  
* Conversion to and from External Data::  
* General Guidelines for Writing Mule-Aware Code::  
* An Example of Mule-Aware Code::  
* Mule-izing Code::             
@end menu

@node Character-Related Data Types, Working With Character and Byte Positions, Coding for Mule, Coding for Mule
@subsection Character-Related Data Types
@cindex character-related data types
@cindex data types, character-related

First, let's review the basic character-related datatypes used by
XEmacs.  Note that some of the separate @code{typedef}s are not
mandatory, but they improve clarity of code a great deal, because one
glance at the declaration can tell the intended use of the variable.

@table @code
@item Ichar
@cindex Ichar
An @code{Ichar} holds a single Emacs character.

Obviously, the equality between characters and bytes is lost in the Mule
world.  Characters can be represented by one or more bytes in the
buffer, and @code{Ichar} is a C type large enough to hold any
character.  (This currently isn't quite true for ISO 10646, which
defines a character as a 31-bit non-negative quantity, while XEmacs
characters are only 30-bits.  This is irrelevant, unless you are
considering using the ISO 10646 private groups to support really large
private character sets---in particular, the Mule character set!---in
a version of XEmacs using Unicode internally.)

Without Mule support, an @code{Ichar} is equivalent to an
@code{unsigned char}.  [[This doesn't seem to be true; @file{lisp.h}
unconditionally @samp{typedef}s @code{Ichar} to @code{int}.]]

@item Ibyte
@cindex Ibyte
The data representing the text in a buffer or string is logically a set
of @code{Ibyte}s.

XEmacs does not work with the same character formats all the time; when
reading characters from the outside, it decodes them to an internal
format, and likewise encodes them when writing.  @code{Ibyte} (in fact
@code{unsigned char}) is the basic unit of XEmacs internal buffers and
strings format.  An @code{Ibyte *} is the type that points at text
encoded in the variable-width internal encoding.

One character can correspond to one or more @code{Ibyte}s.  In the
current Mule implementation, an ASCII character is represented by the
same @code{Ibyte}, and other characters are represented by a sequence
of two or more @code{Ibyte}s.  (This will also be true of an
implementation using UTF-8 as the internal encoding.  In fact, only code
that implements character code conversions and a very few macros used to
implement motion by whole characters will notice the difference between
UTF-8 and the Mule encoding.)

Without Mule support, there are exactly 256 characters, implicitly
Latin-1, and each character is represented using one @code{Ibyte}, and
there is a one-to-one correspondence between @code{Ibyte}s and
@code{Ichar}s.

@item Charxpos
@item Charbpos
@itemx Charcount
@cindex Charxpos
@cindex Charbpos
@cindex Charcount
A @code{Charbpos} represents a character position in a buffer.  A
@code{Charcount} represents a number (count) of characters.  Logically,
subtracting two @code{Charbpos} values yields a @code{Charcount} value.
When representing a character position in a string, we just use
@code{Charcount} directly.  The reason for having a separate typedef for
buffer positions is that they are 1-based, whereas string positions are
0-based and hence string counts and positions can be freely intermixed (a
string position is equivalent to the count of characters from the
beginning).  When representing a character position that could be either
in a buffer or string (for example, in the extent code), @code{Charxpos}
is used.  Although all of these are @code{typedef}ed to
@code{EMACS_INT}, we use them in preference to @code{EMACS_INT} to make
it clear what sort of position is being used.

@code{Charxpos}, @code{Charbpos} and @code{Charcount} values are the
only ones that are ever visible to Lisp.

@item Bytexpos
@itemx Bytecount
@cindex Bytebpos
@cindex Bytecount
A @code{Bytebpos} represents a byte position in a buffer.  A
@code{Bytecount} represents the distance between two positions, in
bytes.  Byte positions in strings use @code{Bytecount}, and for byte
positions that can be either in a buffer or string, @code{Bytexpos} is
used.  The relationship between @code{Bytexpos}, @code{Bytebpos} and
@code{Bytecount} is the same as the relationship between
@code{Charxpos}, @code{Charbpos} and @code{Charcount}.

@item Extbyte
@cindex Extbyte
When dealing with the outside world, XEmacs works with @code{Extbyte}s,
which are equivalent to @code{char}.  The distance between two
@code{Extbyte}s is a @code{Bytecount}, since external text is a
byte-by-byte encoding.  Extbytes occur mainly at the transition point
between internal text and external functions.  XEmacs code should not,
if it can possibly avoid it, do any actual manipulation using external
text, since its format is completely unpredictable (it might not even be
ASCII-compatible).
@end table

@node Working With Character and Byte Positions, Conversion to and from External Data, Character-Related Data Types, Coding for Mule
@subsection Working With Character and Byte Positions
@cindex character and byte positions, working with
@cindex byte positions, working with character and
@cindex positions, working with character and byte

Now that we have defined the basic character-related types, we can look
at the macros and functions designed for work with them and for
conversion between them.  Most of these macros are defined in
@file{buffer.h}, and we don't discuss all of them here, but only the
most important ones.  Examining the existing code is the best way to
learn about them.

@table @code
@item MAX_ICHAR_LEN
@cindex MAX_ICHAR_LEN
This preprocessor constant is the maximum number of buffer bytes to
represent an Emacs character in the variable width internal encoding.
It is useful when allocating temporary strings to keep a known number of
characters.  For instance:

@example
@group
@{
  Charcount cclen;
  ...
  @{
    /* Allocate place for @var{cclen} characters. */
    Ibyte *buf = (Ibyte *) alloca (cclen * MAX_ICHAR_LEN);
...
@end group
@end example

If you followed the previous section, you can guess that, logically,
multiplying a @code{Charcount} value with @code{MAX_ICHAR_LEN} produces
a @code{Bytecount} value.

In the current Mule implementation, @code{MAX_ICHAR_LEN} equals 4.
Without Mule, it is 1.  In a mature Unicode-based XEmacs, it will also
be 4 (since all Unicode characters can be encoded in UTF-8 in 4 bytes or
less), but some versions may use up to 6, in order to use the large
private space provided by ISO 10646 to ``mirror'' the Mule code space.

@item itext_ichar
@itemx set_itext_ichar
@cindex itext_ichar
@cindex set_itext_ichar
The @code{itext_ichar} macro takes a @code{Ibyte} pointer and
returns the @code{Ichar} stored at that position.  If it were a
function, its prototype would be:

@example
Ichar itext_ichar (Ibyte *p);
@end example

@code{set_itext_ichar} stores an @code{Ichar} to the specified byte
position.  It returns the number of bytes stored:

@example
Bytecount set_itext_ichar (Ibyte *p, Ichar c);
@end example

It is important to note that @code{set_itext_ichar} is safe only for
appending a character at the end of a buffer, not for overwriting a
character in the middle.  This is because the width of characters
varies, and @code{set_itext_ichar} cannot resize the string if it
writes, say, a two-byte character where a single-byte character used to
reside.

A typical use of @code{set_itext_ichar} can be demonstrated by this
example, which copies characters from buffer @var{buf} to a temporary
string of Ibytes.

@example
@group
@{
  Charbpos pos;
  for (pos = beg; pos < end; pos++)
    @{
      Ichar c = BUF_FETCH_CHAR (buf, pos);
      p += set_itext_ichar (buf, c);
    @}
@}
@end group
@end example

Note how @code{set_itext_ichar} is used to store the @code{Ichar}
and increment the counter, at the same time.

@item INC_IBYTEPTR
@itemx DEC_IBYTEPTR
@cindex INC_IBYTEPTR
@cindex DEC_IBYTEPTR
These two macros increment and decrement an @code{Ibyte} pointer,
respectively.  They will adjust the pointer by the appropriate number of
bytes according to the byte length of the character stored there.  Both
macros assume that the memory address is located at the beginning of a
valid character.

Without Mule support, @code{INC_IBYTEPTR (p)} and @code{DEC_IBYTEPTR (p)}
simply expand to @code{p++} and @code{p--}, respectively.

@item bytecount_to_charcount
@cindex bytecount_to_charcount
Given a pointer to a text string and a length in bytes, return the
equivalent length in characters.

@example
Charcount bytecount_to_charcount (Ibyte *p, Bytecount bc);
@end example

@item charcount_to_bytecount
@cindex charcount_to_bytecount
Given a pointer to a text string and a length in characters, return the
equivalent length in bytes.

@example
Bytecount charcount_to_bytecount (Ibyte *p, Charcount cc);
@end example

@item itext_n_addr
@cindex itext_n_addr
Return a pointer to the beginning of the character offset @var{cc} (in
characters) from @var{p}.

@example
Ibyte *itext_n_addr (Ibyte *p, Charcount cc);
@end example
@end table

@node Conversion to and from External Data, General Guidelines for Writing Mule-Aware Code, Working With Character and Byte Positions, Coding for Mule
@subsection Conversion to and from External Data
@cindex conversion to and from external data
@cindex external data, conversion to and from

When an external function, such as a C library function, returns a
@code{char} pointer, you should almost never treat it as @code{Ibyte}.
This is because these returned strings may contain 8bit characters which
can be misinterpreted by XEmacs, and cause a crash.  Likewise, when
exporting a piece of internal text to the outside world, you should
always convert it to an appropriate external encoding, lest the internal
stuff (such as the infamous \201 characters) leak out.

The interface to conversion between the internal and external
representations of text are the numerous conversion macros defined in
@file{buffer.h}.  There used to be a fixed set of external formats
supported by these macros, but now any coding system can be used with
them.  The coding system alias mechanism is used to create the
following logical coding systems, which replace the fixed external
formats.  The (dontusethis-set-symbol-value-handler) mechanism was
enhanced to make this possible (more work on that is needed).

Often useful coding systems:

@table @code
@item Qbinary
This is the simplest format and is what we use in the absence of a more
appropriate format.  This converts according to the @code{binary} coding
system:

@enumerate a
@item
On input, bytes 0--255 are converted into (implicitly Latin-1)
characters 0--255.  A non-Mule xemacs doesn't really know about
different character sets and the fonts to display them, so the bytes can
be treated as text in different 1-byte encodings by simply setting the
appropriate fonts.  So in a sense, non-Mule xemacs is a multi-lingual
editor if, for example, different fonts are used to display text in
different buffers, faces, or windows.  The specifier mechanism gives the
user complete control over this kind of behavior.
@item
On output, characters 0--255 are converted into bytes 0--255 and other
characters are converted into @samp{~}.
@end enumerate

@item Qnative
Format used for the external Unix environment---@code{argv[]}, stuff
from @code{getenv()}, stuff from the @file{/etc/passwd} file, etc.
This is encoded according to the encoding specified by the current locale.
[[This is dangerous; current locale is user preference, and the system
is probably going to be something else.  Is there anything we can do
about it?]]

@item Qfile_name
Format used for filenames.  This is normally the same as @code{Qnative},
but the two should be distinguished for clarity and possible future
separation -- and also because @code{Qfile_name} can be changed using either
the @code{file-name-coding-system} or @code{pathname-coding-system} (now
obsolete) variables.

@item Qctext
Compound-text format.  This is the standard X11 format used for data
stored in properties, selections, and the like.  This is an 8-bit
no-lock-shift ISO2022 coding system.  This is a real coding system,
unlike @code{Qfile_name}, which is user-definable.

@item Qmswindows_tstr
Used for external data in all MS Windows functions that are declared to
accept data of type @code{LPTSTR} or @code{LPCSTR}.  This maps to either
@code{Qmswindows_multibyte} (a locale-specific encoding, same as
@code{Qnative}) or @code{Qmswindows_unicode}, depending on whether
XEmacs is being run under Windows 9X or Windows NT/2000/XP.
@end table

Many other coding systems are provided by default.

There are two fundamental macros to convert between external and
internal format, as well as various convenience macros to simplify the
most common operations.

@code{TO_INTERNAL_FORMAT} converts external data to internal format, and
@code{TO_EXTERNAL_FORMAT} converts the other way around.  The arguments
each of these receives are a source type, a source, a sink type, a sink,
and a coding system (or a symbol naming a coding system).

A typical call looks like
@example
TO_EXTERNAL_FORMAT (LISP_STRING, str, C_STRING_MALLOC, ptr, Qfile_name);
@end example

which means that the contents of the lisp string @code{str} are written
to a malloc'ed memory area which will be pointed to by @code{ptr}, after
the function returns.  The conversion will be done using the
@code{file-name} coding system, which will be controlled by the user
indirectly by setting or binding the variable
@code{file-name-coding-system}.

Some sources and sinks require two C variables to specify.  We use some
preprocessor magic to allow different source and sink types, and even
different numbers of arguments to specify different types of sources and
sinks.

So we can have a call that looks like
@example
TO_INTERNAL_FORMAT (DATA, (ptr, len),
                    MALLOC, (ptr, len),
                    coding_system);
@end example

The parenthesized argument pairs are required to make the preprocessor
magic work.

Here are the different source and sink types:

@table @code
@item @code{DATA, (ptr, len),}
input data is a fixed buffer of size @var{len} at address @var{ptr}
@item @code{ALLOCA, (ptr, len),}
output data is placed in an @code{alloca()}ed buffer of size @var{len} pointed to by @var{ptr}
@item @code{MALLOC, (ptr, len),}
output data is in a @code{malloc()}ed buffer of size @var{len} pointed to by @var{ptr}
@item @code{C_STRING_ALLOCA, ptr,}
equivalent to @code{ALLOCA (ptr, len_ignored)} on output.
@item @code{C_STRING_MALLOC, ptr,}
equivalent to @code{MALLOC (ptr, len_ignored)} on output
@item @code{C_STRING, ptr,}
equivalent to @code{DATA, (ptr, strlen/wcslen (ptr))} on input
@item @code{LISP_STRING, string,}
input or output is a Lisp_Object of type string
@item @code{LISP_BUFFER, buffer,}
output is written to @code{(point)} in lisp buffer @var{buffer}
@item @code{LISP_LSTREAM, lstream,}
input or output is a Lisp_Object of type lstream
@item @code{LISP_OPAQUE, object,}
input or output is a Lisp_Object of type opaque
@end table

A source type of @code{C_STRING} or a sink type of
@code{C_STRING_ALLOCA} or @code{C_STRING_MALLOC} is appropriate where
the external API is not '\0'-byte-clean -- i.e. it expects strings to be
terminated with a null byte.  For external APIs that are in fact
'\0'-byte-clean, we should of course not use these.

The sinks to be specified must be lvalues, unless they are the lisp
object types @code{LISP_LSTREAM} or @code{LISP_BUFFER}.

There is no problem using the same lvalue for source and sink.

Garbage collection is inhibited during these conversion operations, so
it is OK to pass in data from Lisp strings using @code{XSTRING_DATA}.

For the sink types @code{ALLOCA} and @code{C_STRING_ALLOCA}, the
resulting text is stored in a stack-allocated buffer, which is
automatically freed on returning from the function.  However, the sink
types @code{MALLOC} and @code{C_STRING_MALLOC} return @code{xmalloc()}ed
memory.  The caller is responsible for freeing this memory using
@code{xfree()}.

Note that it doesn't make sense for @code{LISP_STRING} to be a source
for @code{TO_INTERNAL_FORMAT} or a sink for @code{TO_EXTERNAL_FORMAT}.
You'll get an assertion failure if you try.

99% of conversions involve raw data or Lisp strings as both source and
sink, and usually data is output as @code{alloca()}, or sometimes
@code{xmalloc()}.  For this reason, convenience macros are defined for
many types of conversions involving raw data and/or Lisp strings,
especially when the output is an @code{alloca()}ed string. (When the
destination is a Lisp string, there are other functions that should be
used instead -- @code{build_ext_string()} and @code{make_ext_string()},
for example.) The convenience macros are of two types -- the older kind
that store the result into a specified variable, and the newer kind that
return the result.  The newer kind of macros don't exist when the output
is sized data, because that would have two return values.  NOTE: All
convenience macros are ultimately defined in terms of
@code{TO_EXTERNAL_FORMAT} and @code{TO_INTERNAL_FORMAT}.  Thus, any
comments above about the workings of these macros also apply to all
convenience macros.

A typical old-style convenience macro is

@example
  C_STRING_TO_EXTERNAL (in, out, codesys);
@end example

This is equivalent to

@example
  TO_EXTERNAL_FORMAT (C_STRING, in, C_STRING_ALLOCA, out, codesys);
@end example

but is easier to write and somewhat clearer, since it clearly identifies
the arguments without the clutter of having the preprocessor types mixed
in.

The new-style equivalent is @code{NEW_C_STRING_TO_EXTERNAL (src,
codesys)}, which @emph{returns} the converted data (still in
@code{alloca()} space).  This is far more convenient for most
operations.

@node General Guidelines for Writing Mule-Aware Code, An Example of Mule-Aware Code, Conversion to and from External Data, Coding for Mule
@subsection General Guidelines for Writing Mule-Aware Code
@cindex writing Mule-aware code, general guidelines for
@cindex Mule-aware code, general guidelines for writing
@cindex code, general guidelines for writing Mule-aware

This section contains some general guidance on how to write Mule-aware
code, as well as some pitfalls you should avoid.

@table @emph
@item Never use @code{char} and @code{char *}.
In XEmacs, the use of @code{char} and @code{char *} is almost always a
mistake.  If you want to manipulate an Emacs character from ``C'', use
@code{Ichar}.  If you want to examine a specific octet in the internal
format, use @code{Ibyte}.  If you want a Lisp-visible character, use a
@code{Lisp_Object} and @code{make_char}.  If you want a pointer to move
through the internal text, use @code{Ibyte *}.  Also note that you
almost certainly do not need @code{Ichar *}.  Other typedefs to clarify
the use of @code{char} are @code{Char_ASCII}, @code{Char_Binary},
@code{UChar_Binary}, and @code{CIbyte}.

@item Be careful not to confuse @code{Charcount}, @code{Bytecount}, @code{Charbpos} and @code{Bytebpos}.
The whole point of using different types is to avoid confusion about the
use of certain variables.  Lest this effect be nullified, you need to be
careful about using the right types.

@item Always convert external data
It is extremely important to always convert external data, because
XEmacs can crash if unexpected 8-bit sequences are copied to its internal
buffers literally.

This means that when a system function, such as @code{readdir}, returns
a string, you normally need to convert it using one of the conversion macros
described in the previous chapter, before passing it further to Lisp.

Actually, most of the basic system functions that accept '\0'-terminated
string arguments, like @code{stat()} and @code{open()}, have
@strong{encapsulated} equivalents that do the internal to external
conversion themselves.  The encapsulated equivalents have a @code{qxe_}
prefix and have string arguments of type @code{Ibyte *}, and you can
pass internally encoded data to them, often from a Lisp string using
@code{XSTRING_DATA}. (A better design might be to provide versions that
accept Lisp strings directly.)  [[Really?  Then they'd either take
@code{Lisp_Object}s and need to check type, or they'd take
@code{Lisp_String}s, and violate the rules about passing any of the
specific Lisp types.]]

Also note that many internal functions, such as @code{make_string},
accept Ibytes, which removes the need for them to convert the data they
receive.  This increases efficiency because that way external data needs
to be decoded only once, when it is read.  After that, it is passed
around in internal format.

@item Do all work in internal format
External-formatted data is completely unpredictable in its format.  It
may be fixed-width Unicode (not even ASCII compatible); it may be a
modal encoding, in
which case some occurrences of (e.g.) the slash character may be part of
two-byte Asian-language characters, and a naive attempt to split apart a
pathname by slashes will fail; etc.  Internal-format text should be
converted to external format only at the point where an external API is
actually called, and the first thing done after receiving
external-format text from an external API should be to convert it to
internal text.
@end table

@node An Example of Mule-Aware Code, Mule-izing Code, General Guidelines for Writing Mule-Aware Code, Coding for Mule
@subsection An Example of Mule-Aware Code
@cindex code, an example of Mule-aware
@cindex Mule-aware code, an example of

As an example of Mule-aware code, we will analyze the @code{string}
function, which conses up a Lisp string from the character arguments it
receives.  Here is the definition, pasted from @code{alloc.c}:

@example
@group
DEFUN ("string", Fstring, 0, MANY, 0, /*
Concatenate all the argument characters and make the result a string.
*/
       (int nargs, Lisp_Object *args))
@{
  Ibyte *storage = alloca_array (Ibyte, nargs * MAX_ICHAR_LEN);
  Ibyte *p = storage;

  for (; nargs; nargs--, args++)
    @{
      Lisp_Object lisp_char = *args;
      CHECK_CHAR_COERCE_INT (lisp_char);
      p += set_itext_ichar (p, XCHAR (lisp_char));
    @}
  return make_string (storage, p - storage);
@}
@end group
@end example

Now we can analyze the source line by line.

Obviously, string will be as long as there are arguments to the
function.  This is why we allocate @code{MAX_ICHAR_LEN} * @var{nargs}
bytes on the stack, i.e. the worst-case number of bytes for @var{nargs}
@code{Ichar}s to fit in the string.

Then, the loop checks that each element is a character, converting
integers in the process.  Like many other functions in XEmacs, this
function silently accepts integers where characters are expected, for
historical and compatibility reasons.  Unless you know what you are
doing, @code{CHECK_CHAR} will also suffice.  @code{XCHAR (lisp_char)}
extracts the @code{Ichar} from the @code{Lisp_Object}, and
@code{set_itext_ichar} stores it to storage, increasing @code{p} in
the process.

Other instructive examples of correct coding under Mule can be found all
over the XEmacs code.  For starters, I recommend
@code{Fnormalize_menu_item_name} in @file{menubar.c}.  After you have
understood this section of the manual and studied the examples, you can
proceed writing new Mule-aware code.

@node Mule-izing Code,  , An Example of Mule-Aware Code, Coding for Mule
@subsection Mule-izing Code

A lot of code is written without Mule in mind, and needs to be made
Mule-correct or "Mule-ized".  There is really no substitute for
line-by-line analysis when doing this, but the following checklist can
help:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Check all uses of @code{XSTRING_DATA}.
@item
Check all uses of @code{build_string} and @code{make_string}.
@item
Check all uses of @code{tolower} and @code{toupper}.
@item
Check object print methods.
@item
Check for use of functions such as @code{write_c_string},
@code{write_fmt_string}, @code{stderr_out}, @code{stdout_out}.
@item
Check all occurrences of @code{char} and correct to one of the other
typedefs described above.
@item
Check all existing uses of @code{TO_EXTERNAL_FORMAT},
@code{TO_INTERNAL_FORMAT}, and any convenience macros (grep for
@samp{EXTERNAL_TO}, @samp{TO_EXTERNAL}, and @samp{TO_SIZED_EXTERNAL}).
@item
In Windows code, string literals may need to be encapsulated with @code{XETEXT}.
@end itemize

@node CCL, Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues, Coding for Mule, Multilingual Support
@section CCL
@cindex CCL

@example
MACHINE CODE:

The machine code consists of a vector of 32-bit words.
The first such word specifies the start of the EOF section of the code;
this is the code executed to handle any stuff that needs to be done
(e.g. designating back to ASCII and left-to-right mode) after all
other encoded/decoded data has been written out.  This is not used for
charset CCL programs.

REGISTER: 0..7  -- referred by RRR or rrr

OPERATOR BIT FIELD (27-bit): XXXXXXXXXXXXXXX RRR TTTTT
        TTTTT (5-bit): operator type
        RRR (3-bit): register number
        XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX (15-bit):
                CCCCCCCCCCCCCCC: constant or address
                000000000000rrr: register number

AAAA:   00000 +
        00001 -
        00010 *
        00011 /
        00100 %
        00101 &
        00110 |
        00111 ~

        01000 <<
        01001 >>
        01010 <8
        01011 >8
        01100 //
        01101 not used
        01110 not used
        01111 not used

        10000 <
        10001 >
        10010 ==
        10011 <=
        10100 >=
        10101 !=

OPERATORS:      TTTTT RRR XX..

SetCS:          00000 RRR C...C      RRR = C...C
SetCL:          00001 RRR .....      RRR = c...c
                c.............c
SetR:           00010 RRR ..rrr      RRR = rrr
SetA:           00011 RRR ..rrr      RRR = array[rrr]
                C.............C      size of array = C...C
                c.............c      contents = c...c

Jump:           00100 000 c...c      jump to c...c
JumpCond:       00101 RRR c...c      if (!RRR) jump to c...c
WriteJump:      00110 RRR c...c      Write1 RRR, jump to c...c
WriteReadJump:  00111 RRR c...c      Write1, Read1 RRR, jump to c...c
WriteCJump:     01000 000 c...c      Write1 C...C, jump to c...c
                C...C
WriteCReadJump: 01001 RRR c...c      Write1 C...C, Read1 RRR,
                C.............C      and jump to c...c
WriteSJump:     01010 000 c...c      WriteS, jump to c...c
                C.............C
                S.............S
                ...
WriteSReadJump: 01011 RRR c...c      WriteS, Read1 RRR, jump to c...c
                C.............C
                S.............S
                ...
WriteAReadJump: 01100 RRR c...c      WriteA, Read1 RRR, jump to c...c
                C.............C      size of array = C...C
                c.............c      contents = c...c
                ...
Branch:         01101 RRR C...C      if (RRR >= 0 && RRR < C..)
                c.............c      branch to (RRR+1)th address
Read1:          01110 RRR ...        read 1-byte to RRR
Read2:          01111 RRR ..rrr      read 2-byte to RRR and rrr
ReadBranch:     10000 RRR C...C      Read1 and Branch
                c.............c
                ...
Write1:         10001 RRR .....      write 1-byte RRR
Write2:         10010 RRR ..rrr      write 2-byte RRR and rrr
WriteC:         10011 000 .....      write 1-char C...CC
                C.............C
WriteS:         10100 000 .....      write C..-byte of string
                C.............C
                S.............S
                ...
WriteA:         10101 RRR .....      write array[RRR]
                C.............C      size of array = C...C
                c.............c      contents = c...c
                ...
End:            10110 000 .....      terminate the execution

SetSelfCS:      10111 RRR C...C      RRR AAAAA= C...C
                ..........AAAAA
SetSelfCL:      11000 RRR .....      RRR AAAAA= c...c
                c.............c
                ..........AAAAA
SetSelfR:       11001 RRR ..Rrr      RRR AAAAA= rrr
                ..........AAAAA
SetExprCL:      11010 RRR ..Rrr      RRR = rrr AAAAA c...c
                c.............c
                ..........AAAAA
SetExprR:       11011 RRR ..rrr      RRR = rrr AAAAA Rrr
                ............Rrr
                ..........AAAAA
JumpCondC:      11100 RRR c...c      if !(RRR AAAAA C..) jump to c...c
                C.............C
                ..........AAAAA
JumpCondR:      11101 RRR c...c      if !(RRR AAAAA rrr) jump to c...c
                ............rrr
                ..........AAAAA
ReadJumpCondC:  11110 RRR c...c      Read1 and JumpCondC
                C.............C
                ..........AAAAA
ReadJumpCondR:  11111 RRR c...c      Read1 and JumpCondR
                ............rrr
                ..........AAAAA
@end example

@node Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues, Modules for Internationalization, CCL, Multilingual Support
@section Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues
@cindex Microsoft Windows-related multilingual issues
@cindex Windows-related multilingual issues
@cindex multilingual issues, Windows-related

@menu
* Microsoft Documentation::     
* Locales::                     
* More about code pages::       
* More about locales::          
* Unicode support under Windows::  
* The golden rules of writing Unicode-safe code::  
* The format of the locale in setlocale()::  
* Random other Windows I18N docs::  
@end menu

@node Microsoft Documentation, Locales, Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues, Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues
@subsection Microsoft Documentation
@cindex Microsoft documentation

Documentation on international support in Windows is scattered throughout MSDN.
Here are some good places to look:

@enumerate
@item
C Runtime (CRT) intl support

@enumerate
@item
Visual Tools and Languages -> Visual Studio 6.0 Documentation -> Visual C++ Documentation -> Using Visual C++ -> Run-Time Library Reference -> Internationalization
@item
Visual Tools and Languages -> Visual Studio 6.0 Documentation -> Visual C++ Documentation -> Using Visual C++ -> Run-Time Library Reference -> Global Constants -> Locale Categories
@item
Visual Tools and Languages -> Visual Studio 6.0 Documentation -> Visual C++ Documentation -> Using Visual C++ -> Run-Time Library Reference -> Appendixes -> Language and Country/Region Strings
@item
Visual Tools and Languages -> Visual Studio 6.0 Documentation -> Visual C++ Documentation -> Using Visual C++ -> Run-Time Library Reference -> Appendixes -> Generic-Text Mappings
@item
Function documentation for various functions:
Visual Tools and Languages -> Visual Studio 6.0 Documentation -> Visual C++ Documentation -> Using Visual C++ -> Run-Time Library Reference -> Alphabetic Function Reference
e.g. _setmbcp(), setlocale(), strcoll functions
@end enumerate

@item
Win32 API intl support

@enumerate
@item
Platform SDK Documentation -> Base Services -> International Features
@item
Platform SDK Documentation -> User Interface Services -> Windows User Interface -> User Input -> Keyboard Input -> Character Messages -> International Features
@item
Backgrounders -> Windows Platform -> Windows 2000 -> International Support in Microsoft Windows 2000
@end enumerate

@item
Microsoft Layer for Unicode

Platform SDK Documentation -> Windows API -> Windows 95/98/Me Programming -> Windows 95/98/Me Overviews -> Microsoft Layer for Unicode on Windows 95/98/Me Systems

@item
Look in the CRT sources!  They come with VC++.  See win32.c.
@end enumerate

@node Locales, More about code pages, Microsoft Documentation, Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues
@subsection Locales, code pages, and other concepts of "language"
@cindex locales, code pages, and other concepts of "language"

First, make sure you clearly understand the difference between the C
runtime library (CRT) and the Win32 API!  See win32.c.

There are various different ways of representing the vague concept
of "language", and it can be very confusing.  So:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The CRT library has the concept of "locale", which is a
combination of language and country, and which controls the way
currency and dates are displayed, the encoding of data, etc.

@item
XEmacs has the concept of "language environment", more or less
like a locale; although currently in most cases it just refers to
the language, and no sub-language distinctions are
made. (Exceptions are with Chinese, which has different language
environments for Taiwan and mainland China, due to the different
encodings and writing systems.)

@item
Windows has a number of different language concepts:

@enumerate
@item
There are "languages" and "sublanguages", which correspond to
the languages and countries of the C library -- e.g. LANG_ENGLISH
and SUBLANG_ENGLISH_US.  These are identified by 8-bit integers,
called the "primary language identifier" and "sublanguage
identifier", respectively.  These are combined into a 16-bit
integer or "language identifier" by MAKELANGID().

@item
The language identifier in turn is combined with a "sort
identifier" (and optionally a "sort version") to yield a 32-bit
integer called a "locale identifier" (type LCID), which identifies
locales -- the primary means of distinguishing language/regional
settings and similar to C library locales.

@item
A "code page" combines the XEmacs concepts of "charset" and "coding
system".  It logically encompasses

@itemize @minus
@item
a set of supported characters
@item
an enumeration associating each character with a code point, which
is a number or number pair; there may be disjoint ranges of numbers
supported
@item
a way of encoding a series of characters into a string of bytes
@end itemize

Note that the first two properties correspond to an XEmacs "charset"
and the latter an XEmacs "coding system".

Traditional encodings are either simple one-byte encodings, or
combination one-byte/two-byte encodings (aka MBCS encodings, where MBCS
stands for "Multibyte Character Set") with the following properties:

@itemize @minus
@item
all characters are encoded as a one-byte or two-byte sequence
@item
the encoding is stateless (non-modal)
@item
the lower 128 bytes are compatible with ASCII
@item
in the higher bytes, the value of the first byte ("lead byte")
determines whether a second byte follows
@item
the values used for second bytes may overlap those used for first
bytes, and (in some encodings) include values in the low half; thus,
moving backwards is hard, and pure-ASCII algorithms (e.g. finding the
next slash) will fail unless rewritten to be MBCS-aware (neither of
these problems exist in UTF-8 or in the XEmacs internal string
encoding)
@end itemize

Recent code pages, however, do not necessarily follow these properties --
code pages have been expanded to include arbitrary encodings, such as
UTF-8 (may have more than two bytes per character) and ISO-2022-JP
(complex modal encoding).

@item
Every Windows locale has four associated code pages: ANSI (an
international standard or some Microsoft-created approximation; the
native code page under Windows), OEM (a DOS encoding, still used in the
FAT file system), Mac (an encoding used on the Macintosh) and EBCDIC (a
non-ASCII-compatible encoding used on IBM mainframes, originally based
on the BCD or "binary-coded decimal" encoding of numbers).  All code
pages associated with a locale follow (as far as I know) the properties
listed above for traditional code pages.  More than one locale can share
a code page -- e.g. all the Western European languages, including
English, do.

@item
Windows also has an "input locale identifier" (aka "keyboard
layout id") or HKL, which is a 32-bit integer composed of the
16-bit language identifier and a 16-bit "device identifier", which
originally specified a particular keyboard layout (e.g. the locale
"US English" can have the QWERTY layout, the Dvorak layout, etc.),
but has been expanded to include speech-to-text converters and
other non-keyboard ways of inputting text.  Note that both the HKL
and LCID share the language identifier in the lower 16 bits, and in
both cases a 0 in the upper 16 bits means "default" (sort order or
device), providing a way to convert between HKL's, LCID's, and
language identifiers (i.e. language/sublanguage pairs).  The
default keyboard layout for a language is (as far as I can
determine) established using the Regional Settings control panel
applet, where you can add input locales as combinations of language
(actually language/sublanguage) and layout; presumably if you list
only one input locale with a particular language, the corresponding
layout is the default for that language.  But what if you list more
than one?  You can specify a single default input locale, but there
appears to be no way to do so on a per-language basis.
@end enumerate
@end itemize

@node More about code pages, More about locales, Locales, Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues
@subsection More about code pages
@cindex more about code pages

Here is what MSDN says about code pages (article "Code Pages"):

@quotation
A code page is a character set, which can include numbers,
punctuation marks, and other glyphs. Different languages and locales
may use different code pages. For example, ANSI code page 1252 is
used for American English and most European languages; OEM code page
932 is used for Japanese Kanji.

A code page can be represented in a table as a mapping of characters
to single-byte values or multibyte values. Many code pages share the
ASCII character set for characters in the range 0x00 ?0x7F.

The Microsoft run-time library uses the following types of code pages:

-- System-default ANSI code page. By default, at startup the run-time
system automatically sets the multibyte code page to the
system-default ANSI code page, which is obtained from the operating
system. The call

setlocale ( LC_ALL, "" );

also sets the locale to the system-default ANSI code page.

-- Locale code page. The behavior of a number of run-time routines is
dependent on the current locale setting, which includes the locale
code page. (For more information, see Locale-Dependent Routines.) By
default, all locale-dependent routines in the Microsoft run-time
library use the code page that corresponds to the ?locale. At
run-time you can change or query the locale code page in use with a
call to setlocale.

-- Multibyte code page. The behavior of most of the multibyte-character
routines in the run-time library depends on the current multibyte
code page setting. By default, these routines use the system-default
ANSI code page. At run-time you can query and change the multibyte
code page with _getmbcp and _setmbcp, respectively.

-- The "C" locale is defined by ANSI to correspond to the locale in
which C programs have traditionally executed. The code page for the 
"C" locale (?code page) corresponds to the ASCII character
set. For example, in the "C" locale, islower returns true for the
values 0x61 ?0x7A only. In another locale, islower may return true
for these as well as other values, as defined by that locale.

Under "Locale-Dependent Routines" we notice the following setlocale
dependencies:

atof, atoi, atol (LC_NUMERIC)
is Routines (LC_CTYPE)
isleadbyte (LC_CTYPE)
localeconv (LC_MONETARY, LC_NUMERIC)
MB_CUR_MAX (LC_CTYPE)
_mbccpy (LC_CTYPE)
_mbclen (LC_CTYPE)
mblen (LC_CTYPE )
_mbstrlen (LC_CTYPE)
mbstowcs (LC_CTYPE)
mbtowc (LC_CTYPE)
printf (LC_NUMERIC, for radix character output)
scanf (LC_NUMERIC, for radix character recognition)
setlocale/_wsetlocale (Not applicable)
strcoll (LC_COLLATE)
_stricoll/_wcsicoll (LC_COLLATE)
_strncoll/_wcsncoll (LC_COLLATE)
_strnicoll/_wcsnicoll (LC_COLLATE)
strftime, wcsftime (LC_TIME)
_strlwr (LC_CTYPE)
strtod/wcstod/strol/wcstol/strtoul/wcstoul (LC_NUMERIC, for radix character recognition)
_strupr (LC_CTYPE)
strxfrm/wcsxfrm (LC_COLLATE)
tolower/towlower (LC_CTYPE)
toupper/towupper (LC_CTYPE)
wcstombs (LC_CTYPE)
wctomb (LC_CTYPE)
_wtoi/_wtol (LC_NUMERIC)
@end quotation

NOTE: The above documentation doesn't clearly explain the "locale code
page" and "multibyte code page".  These are two different values,
maintained respectively in the CRT global variables __lc_codepage and
__mbcodepage.  Calling e.g. setlocale (LC_ALL, "JAPANESE") sets @strong{ONLY}
__lc_codepage to 932 (the code page for Japanese), and leaves
__mbcodepage unchanged (usually 1252, i.e. Windows-ANSI).  You'd have to
call _setmbcp() to change __mbcodepage.  Figuring out from the
documentation which routines use which code page is not so obvious.  But:

@itemize @bullet
@item
from "Interpretation of Multibyte-Character Sequences" it appears that
all "multibyte-character routines" use the multibyte code page except for
mblen(), _mbstrlen(), mbstowcs(), mbtowc(), wcstombs(), and wctomb().

@item
from "_setmbcp": "The multibyte code page also affects
multibyte-character processing by the following run-time library
routines: _exec functions _mktemp _stat _fullpath _spawn functions
_tempnam _makepath _splitpath tmpnam.  In addition, all run-time library
routines that receive multibyte-character argv or envp program arguments
as parameters (such as the _exec and _spawn families) process these
strings according to the multibyte code page. Hence these routines are
also affected by a call to _setmbcp that changes the multibyte code
page."
@end itemize

Summary: from looking at the CRT source (which comes with VC++) and
carefully looking through the docs, it appears that:

@itemize @bullet
@item
the "locale code page" is used by all of the routines listed above
under "Locale-Dependent Routines" (EXCEPT _mbccpy() and _mbclen()),
as well as any other place that converts between multibyte and Unicode
strings, e.g. the startup code.
@item
the "multibyte code page" is used in all of the *mb*() routines
except mblen(), _mbstrlen(), mbstowcs(), mbtowc(), wcstombs(),
and wctomb(); also _exec*(), _spawn*(), _mktemp(), _stat(), _fullpath(),
_tempnam(), _makepath(), _splitpath(), tmpnam(), and similar functions
without the leading underscore.
@end itemize

@node More about locales, Unicode support under Windows, More about code pages, Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues
@subsection More about locales
@cindex more about locales

In addition to the locale defined by the CRT, Windows (i.e. the Win32 API)
defines various locales:

@itemize @bullet
@item
The system-default locale is the locale defined under "Language
settings for the system" in the "Regional Options" control panel.  This
is NOT user-specific, and changing it requires a reboot (at least under
Windows 2000).  The ANSI code page of the system-default locale is
returned by GetACP(), and you can specify this code page in calls
e.g. to MultiByteToWideChar with the constant CP_ACP.

@item
The user-default locale is the locale defined under "Settings for the
current user" in the "Regional Options" control panel.

@item
There is a thread-local locale set by SetThreadLocale. #### What is this
used for?
@end itemize

The Win32 API has a bunch of multibyte functions -- all of those that
end with ...A(), and on which we spend so much effort in
intl-encap-win32.c.  These appear to ALWAYS use the ANSI code page of
the system-default locale (GetACP(), CP_ACP).  Note that this applies
also, for example, to the encoding of filenames in all file-handling
routines, including the CRT ones such as open(), because they pass their
args unchanged to the Win32 API.

@node Unicode support under Windows, The golden rules of writing Unicode-safe code, More about locales, Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues
@subsection Unicode support under Windows
@cindex unicode support under windows

Basically, the whole concept of locales and code pages is broken, because
it is extremely messy to support and does not allow for documents that use
multiple languages simultaneously.  Unicode was designed in response to
this, the idea being to create a single character set that could be used to
encode all the world's languages.  Windows has supported Unicode since the
beginning of the Win32 API.  Internally, every code page has an associated
table to convert the characters of that code page to and from Unicode, and
the Win32 API itself probably (perhaps always) uses Unicode internally.

Under Windows there are two different versions of all library routines that
accept or return text, those that handle Unicode text and those handling
"multibyte" text, i.e. variable-width ASCII-compatible text in some
national format such as EUC or Shift-JIS.  Because Windows 95 basically
doesn't support Unicode but Windows NT does, and Microsoft doesn't provide
any way of writing a single binary that will work on both systems and still
use Unicode when it's available (although see below, Microsoft Layer for
Unicode), we need to provide a way of run-time conditionalizing so you
could have one binary for both systems.  "Unicode-splitting" refers to
writing code that will handle this properly.  This means using
Qmswindows_tstr as the external conversion format, calling the appropriate
qxe...() Unicode-split version of library functions, and doing other things
in certain cases, e.g. when a qxe() function is not present.

Unicode support also requires that the various Windows APIs be
"Unicode-encapsulated", so that they automatically call the ANSI or
Unicode version of the API call appropriately and handle the size
differences in structures.  What this means is:

@itemize @bullet
@item
first, note that Windows already provides a sort of encapsulation
of all APIs that deal with text.  All such APIs are underlyingly
provided in two versions, with an A or W suffix (ANSI or "wide"
i.e. Unicode), and the compile-time constant UNICODE controls which is
selected by the unsuffixed API.  Same thing happens with structures, and
also with types, where the generic types have names beginning with T --
TCHAR, LPTSTR, etc..  Unfortunately, this is compile-time only, not
run-time, so not sufficient. (Creating the necessary run-time encoding
is not conceptually difficult, but very time-consuming to write.  It
adds no significant overhead, and the only reason it's not standard in
Windows is conscious marketing attempts by Microsoft to cripple Windows
95.  FUCK MICROSOFT!  They even describe in a KnowledgeBase article
exactly how to create such an API [although we don't exactly follow
their procedure], and point out its usefulness; the procedure is also
described more generally in Nadine Kano's book on Win32
internationalization -- written SIX YEARS AGO!  Obviously Microsoft has
such an API available internally.)

@item
what we do is provide an encapsulation of each standard Windows API call
that is split into A and W versions.  current theory is to avoid all
preprocessor games; so we name the function with a prefix -- "qxe"
currently -- and require callers to use the prefixed name.  Callers need
to explicitly use the W version of all structures, and convert text
themselves using Qmswindows_tstr.  the qxe encapsulated version will
automatically call the appropriate A or W version depending on whether
we're running on 9x or NT (you can force use of the A calls on NT,
e.g. for testing purposes, using the command- line switch -nuni aka
-no-unicode-lib-calls), and copy data between W and A versions of the
structures as necessary.

@item
We require the caller to handle the actual translation of text to
avoid possible overflow when dealing with fixed-size Windows
structures.  There are no such problems when copying data between
the A and W versions because ANSI text is never larger than its
equivalent Unicode representation.
@end itemize

NOTE NOTE NOTE: As of August 2001, Microsoft (finally!  See my nasty
comment above) released their own Unicode-encapsulation library, called
Microsoft Layer for Unicode on Windows 95/98/Me Systems.  It tries to be
more transparent than we are, in that

@itemize @bullet
@item
its routines do ANSI/Unicode string translation, while we don't, for
efficiency (we already have to do internal/external conversion so it's
no extra burden to do the proper conversion directly rather than always
converting to Unicode and then doing a second conversion to ANSI as
necessary)

@item
rather than requiring separately-named routines (qxeFooBar), they
physically override the existing routines at the link level.  it also
appears that they do this BADLY, in that if you link with the MLU, you
get an application that runs ONLY on Win9x!!! (hint -- use
GetProcAddress()).  there's still no way to create a single binary!
fucking losers.

@item
they assume you compile with UNICODE defined, so there's no need for the
application to explicitly use ...W structures, as we require.

@item
they also intercept windows procedures to deal with notify messages as
necessary, which we don't do yet.

@item
they (of course) don't use Extbyte.
@end itemize

at some point (especially when they fix the single-binary problem!), we
should consider switching.  for the meantime, we'll stick with what i've
already written.  perhaps we should think about adopting some of the
greater transparency they have; but i opted against transparency on
purpose, to make the code easier to follow for someone who's not familiar
with it.  until our library is really complete and bug-free, we should
think twice before doing this.

According to Microsoft documentation, only the following functions are
provided under Windows 9x to support Unicode (see MSDN page "Windows
95/98/Me General Limitations"):

EnumResourceLanguagesW
EnumResourceNamesW
EnumResourceTypesW
ExtTextOutW
FindResourceW
FindResourceExW
GetCharWidthW
GetCommandLineW
GetTextExtentPointW
GetTextExtentPoint32W
lstrcatW
lstrcpyW
lstrlenW
MessageBoxW
MessageBoxExW
MultiByteToWideChar
TextOutW
WideCharToMultiByte

also maybe GetTextExtentExPoint? (KB Q125671 "Unicode Functions Supported
by Windows 95")

Q210341 says this in addition:

@quotation
SUMMARY:

Although Windows 95 is an eight-bit ANSI, or for Far East Windows, a
Multibyte (MBCS) character set operating system, it implements a few
Unicode functions. Windows 98 has added support for a few more
functions and there are techniques to implement additional Unicode
support.

MORE INFORMATION:

Windows 95 is natively an eight-bit character code operating
system. That is, it fundamentally processes all character strings one
byte at a time. Far East versions of Windows 95 are called Multibyte
Character Set (MBCS) systems because they use a signal or lead byte
combined with a second trailing byte to expand the character code
range beyond the 256 limitation of a one-byte representation.

The Unicode standard offers application developers an opportunity to
work with text without the limitations of character set based
systems. For more information on the Unicode standard see the
"References" section of this article. Windows NT is a fully Unicode
capable operating system so it may be desirable to write software that
supports Unicode on Windows 95.

Even though Windows 95 and Windows 98 are not Unicode based, they do
provide some limited Unicode functionality. Drawing of Unicode text is
possible because the TrueType fonts that are used by Windows are
encoded using Unicode. Therefore, a small subset of Win32 functions
have wide character (Unicode) equivalents that are implemented in
Windows 95. To review the list of these functions that was first
published for Windows 95 see the white paper listed in the
"References" section of this article.

The Quick Info information in the Platform SDK describes the following
wide character functions as implemented on Windows 95:

[same list as above minus GetTextExtentExPoint, and minus lstrcpy/lstrcat]

For Windows 98, there have been two more functions implemented:

[lstrcpyW/lstrcatW]

Also available to applications on Windows 95 and later is the
CF_UNICODETEXT clipboard format for exchanging/converting Unicode text
across the clipboard. See Nadine Kano's book listed in the
"References" section of this article.

With this API subset, an application can read, write, display, and
convert Unicode data. However, in some cases an application developer
working with Unicode may find a need to work directly with the glyphs
in the TrueType font file.

Such a case arises if a software developer would like to use the
services of the GetGlyphOutline() function. Unfortunately, there is no
wide character implementation of this function on Windows 95. However,
this function does work with TrueType glyph indices so the solution is
convert the Unicode character code to a glyph index.

A developer might also want to take advantage of the TrueType Open
tables of a font to perform ligature or contextual glyph
substitution. To do this, the application would need to work with
glyph indices. See the "References" section of this article for more
information on converting Unicode to glyph indices.

REFERENCES:

For additional information about Unicode and the GetGlyphOutline
function, click the article number below to view the article in the
Microsoft Knowledge Base:

241358 PRB: The GetGlyphOutlineW Function Fails on Windows 95 and
Windows 98

For additional information about converting Unicode character codes,
click the article number below to view the article in the Microsoft
Knowledge Base:

241020 HOWTO: Translate Unicode Character Codes to TrueType Glyph
Indices in Windows 95

For information on writing applications for world wide markets, please
see the following book:

Developing International Software for Windows 95 and Windows NT by
Nadine Kano.
ISBN 1-55615-840-8 
Microsoft Press. 
Also available on MSDN in the Books section.

Background white paper: Differences in Win32 API Implementations Among
Windows Operating Systems by Noel Nyman.

Available on MSDN in the Windows Platform Guidelines section
@end quotation

However, the C runtime library provides some additional support (according
to the CRT sources, as the docs are not very clear on this):

@itemize @bullet
@item
wmain() is completely supported, and appropriate Unicode-formatted argv
and envp will always be passed.
@item
Likewise, wWinMain() is completely supported. (NOTE: The docs are not at
all clear on how these various entry points interact, and implies that
a windows-subsystem program "must" use WinMain(), while a console-
subsystem program "must" use main(), and a program compiled with UNICODE
(which we don't, see above) "must" use the w*() versions, while a program
not compiled this way "must" use the plain versions.  In fact it appears
that the CRT provides four different compiler entry points, namely
w?(main|WinMain)CRTStartup, and we simply choose the one we like using
the appropriate link flag.
@item
_wenviron, _wputenv
@end itemize

NOTE:

@itemize @bullet
@item
wsetargv.obj uses routines that were buggily left out of MSVCRT; anyway,
from looking at the source, it does NOT correctly work under Win 9x as
it blindly calls the Unicode version of Unicode-split APIs such as
FindFirstFile)

@item
the w*() file routines are @strong{NOT} supported -- or at least, they blindly
call the ...W() versions of the Win32 API calls.
@end itemize

@node The golden rules of writing Unicode-safe code, The format of the locale in setlocale(), Unicode support under Windows, Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues
@subsection The golden rules of writing Unicode-safe code
@cindex the golden rules of writing unicode-safe code

@itemize @bullet
@item
There are no preprocessor games going on.

@item
Do not set the UNICODE constant.

@item
You need to change your code to call the Windows API prefixed with "qxe"
functions (when they exist) and use the ...W structs instead of the
generic ones.  String arguments in the qxe functions are of type Extbyte
*.

@item
You code is responsible for conversion of text arguments.  We try to
handle everything else -- the argument differences, the copying back and
forth of structures, etc.  Use Qmswindows_tstr and macros such as
C_STRING_TO_TSTR.  You are also responsible for interpreting and
specifying string sizes, which have not been changed.  Usually these are
in characters, meaning you need to divide by XETCHAR_SIZE. (But, some
functions want sizes in bytes, even with Unicode strings.  Look in the
documentation.) Use XETEXT when specifying string constants, so that
they show up in Unicode as necessary.

@item
If you need to process external strings (in general you should not do
this; do all your manipulations in internal format and convert at the
point of entry into or exit from the function), use the xet...()
functions.

@item
If you have to declare a fixed array to hold a string coming from
Windows (and hence either multibyte or Unicode), declare it of type
Extbyte[] and multiply the size by MAX_XETCHAR_SIZE.
@end itemize

@node The format of the locale in setlocale(), Random other Windows I18N docs, The golden rules of writing Unicode-safe code, Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues
@subsection The format of the locale in setlocale()
@cindex the format of the locale in setlocale()

It appears that under Unix the standard format for the string in
setlocale() involves two-letter language and country abbreviations, e.g.
ja or ja_jp or ja_jp.euc for Japanese.  Windows (MSDN article "Language
Strings" in the run-time reference appendix, see doc list above) speaks
of "(primary) language" and "sublanguage" (usually a country, but in the
case of Chinese the sublanguage is "simplified" or "traditional").  It
is highly flexible in what it takes, and thankfully it canonicalizes the
result to a unique form "Language_Country.Encoding".  It allows (note
that all specifications can be in any case):

@itemize @bullet
@item
the full "language_country.encoding" specification or just
language_country", in which case the default encoding will be chosen.

@item
a three-letter acronym, consisting of the ISO-standard two-letter
language abbreviation followed by a third letter indicating the
sublanguage.

@item
just a language name, e.g. "dutch", standing for the combination of
the language with "default" as sublanguage, referring to the default
(often "prototypical") country for that language (in this case the
Netherlands).  You can abbreviate the name by removing any number of
letters from the end.  Ambiguity is not a problem: Even specifying
just a single letter is valid providing any language starting with
that letter exists, but the result may not be what you want (e.g. "c"
maps to "catalan", not "chinese", "czech", etc.).  The way of
resolving ambiguity appears fairly random -- it's not alphabetical
("a" maps to "arabic" not "albanian").

@item
a combination of language and sublanguage separated by a hyphen,
e.g. "dutch-belgian"; note that the sublanguage designator in this
case is NOT necessarily the same as the country, e.g. "belgian" vs.
"belgium".  "dutch-belgium" (or even "dutch-belg") does @strong{NOT} get you
the right result, but returns "Dutch_Netherlands.1252" instead!  This
is because, although you may not abbreviate the result, Windows
accepts any unknown value in the sublanguage field and treats it as
equivalent to "default".  Note also that the if the sublanguage name
has underscores in it, you need to change them to spaces, e.g.
"spanish-dominican republic".

@item
sometimes, just a sublanguage name, e.g. "belgian", standing for
the combination of one of the languages spoken in that region and
the sublanguage of the region -- in this case Dutch.  Note that
there is no guarantee of "protypicality" in this case in choice of
language!  You could hardly say that Dutch (aka Flemish) is more
prototypical of Belgium than French.  You cannot abbreviate this
form, if it's allowed at all.
@end itemize

In addition:

@itemize @bullet
@item
note further that you are not limited to the language/sublanguage
combinations predefined by Windows.  You can set weird combinations
like "Chinese_Kenya.1255" (Chinese spoken in Kenya, represented by
Windows-1255, i.e. Hebrew!) and Windows don't complain, despite the
language-encoding inconsistency.  You can also make up a weird
combination and leave out the encoding, e.g. "Chinese_Qatar", which
maps to "Chinese_Qatar.1256", where Windows-1256 is Arabic -- i.e. it
appears to be choosing the encoding based on a default for the
country.

@item
note also that the names for countries are often not what you expect.
"urdu_pakistan" fails, and just "urdu" shows why, as it maps to
"Urdu_Islamic Republic of Pakistan.1256".  That is, some countries
exist in their full name, and the canonicalized form with underscore
is not very forgiving in its handling of country specifications.
Similarly, Uzbekistan is "Republic of Uzbekistan", and "China" is
"People's Republic of China" -- but in this latter case, unlike the
other two, just "China" works as an alias, e.g. "uzbek_china" maps
to "Uzbek_People's Republic of China.936".

@item
note that just the two-letter ISO language code is NOT allowed.
Sometimes you'll get lucky (e.g. "fr" does map to "france"), but
sometimes you'll get no match (e.g. "pl"), and sometimes you'll get
really unlucky in that the call will succeed but with the wrong
language (e.g. "es" maps to "estonian", not "spanish").
@end itemize

As an example, MSDN article "Language Strings" indicates that German
(default) can be specified using "deu" or "german"; German (Austrian)
with "dea" or "german-austrian"; German (Swiss) with "des",
"german-swiss", or "swiss"; French (Swiss) with "french-swiss" or "frs";
and English (USA) with "american", "american english",
"american-english", "english-american", "english-us", "english-usa",
"enu", "us", or "usa".  This is not, of course, an exhaustive list even
for just the given locales -- just "english" works in practice because
English (Default) maps to English (USA). (#### Is this always the case?)

Given the canonicalization, we don't have to worry too much about the
different kinds of inputs to setlocale() -- unlike for Unix, where no
canonicalization is usually performed, the particular locales that
exist vary tremendously from OS to OS, and we need to parse the
uncanonicalized locale spec, directly from the user, to figure out the
encoding to use, making various guesses if not enough information is
present.  Yuck!  The tricky thing under Windows is figuring how to
deal with the sublang.  It appears that the trick of simply passing the
text of the manifest constant itself of the sublang, with appropriate
hacking (e.g. of underscore to space), works most of the time.

@node Random other Windows I18N docs,  , The format of the locale in setlocale(), Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues
@subsection Random other Windows I18N docs
@cindex random other windows i18n docs

Introduction to Internationalization Issues in the Win32 API

Abstract: This page provides an overview of the aspects of the Win32
internationalization API that are relevant to XEmacs, including the
basic distinction between multibyte and Unicode encodings. Also
included are pointers to how XEmacs should make use of this API.

The Win32 API is quite well-designed in its handling of strings
encoded for various character sets. The API is geared around the idea
that two different methods of encoding strings should be
supported. These methods are called multibyte and Unicode,
respectively. The multibyte encoding is compatible with ASCII strings
and is a more efficient representation when dealing with strings
containing primarily ASCII characters, but it has a great number of
serious deficiencies and limitations, including that it is very
difficult and error-prone to work with strings in this encoding, and
any particular string in a multibyte encoding can only contain
characters from a very limited number of character sets. The Unicode
encoding rectifies all of these deficiencies, but it is not compatible
with ASCII strings (in other words, an existing program will not be
able to handle the encoded strings unless it is explicitly modified to
do so), and it takes up twice as much memory space as multibyte
encodings when encoding a purely ASCII string.

Multibyte encodings use a variable number of bytes (either one or two)
to represent characters. ASCII characters are also represented by a
single byte with its high bit not set, and non-ASCII characters are
represented by one or two bytes, the first of which always has its
high bit set. (The second byte, when it exists, may or may not have
its high bit set.) There is no single multibyte encoding. Instead,
there is generally one encoding per non-ASCII character set. Such an
encoding is capable of representing (besides ASCII characters, of
course) only characters from one (or possibly two) particular
character sets.

Multibyte encoding makes processing of strings very difficult. For
example, given a pointer to the beginning of a character within a
string, finding the pointer to the beginning of the previous character
may require backing up all the way to the beginning of the string, and
then moving forward. Also, an operation such as separating out the
components of a path by searching for backslashes will fail if it's
implemented in the simplest (but not multibyte-aware) fashion, because
it may find what appears to be a backslash, but which is actually the
second byte of a two-byte character. Also, the limited number of
character sets that any particular multibyte encoding can represent
means that loss of data is likely if a string is converted from the
XEmacs internal format into a multibyte format.

For these reasons, the C code in XEmacs should never do any sort of
work with multibyte encoded strings (or with strings in any external
encoding for that matter). Strings should always be maintained in the
internal encoding, which is predictable, and converted to an external
encoding only at the point where the string moves from the XEmacs C
code and enters a system library function. Similarly, when a string is
returned from a system library function, it should be immediately
converted into the internal coding before any operations are done on
it.

Unicode, unlike multibyte encodings, is a fixed-width encoding where
every character is represented using 16 bits. It is also capable of
encoding all the characters from all the character sets in common use
in the world. The predictability and completeness of the Unicode
encoding makes it a very good encoding for strings that may contain
characters from many character sets mixed up with each other. At the
same time, of course, it is incompatible with routines that expect
ASCII characters and also incompatible with general string
manipulation routines, which will encounter a great number of what
would appear to be embedded nulls in the string. It also takes twice
as much room to encode strings containing primarily ASCII
characters. This is why XEmacs does not use Unicode or similar
encoding internally for buffers.

The Win32 API cleverly deals with the issue of 8 bit vs. 16 bit
characters by declaring a type called TCHAR which specifies a generic
character, either 8 bits or 16 bits. Generally TCHAR is defined to be
the same as the simple C type char, unless the preprocessor constant
UNICODE is defined, in which case TCHAR is defined to be WCHAR, which
is a 16 bit type. Nearly all functions in the Win32 API that take
strings are defined to take strings that are actually arrays of
TCHARs. There is a type LPTSTR which is defined to be a string of
TCHARs and another type LPCTSTR which is a const string of TCHARs. The
theory is that any program that uses TCHARs exclusively to represent
characters and does not make assumptions about the size of a TCHAR or
the way that the characters are encoded should work transparently
regardless of whether the UNICODE preprocessor constant is defined,
which is to say, regardless of whether 8 bit multibyte or 16 bit
Unicode characters are being used. The way that this is actually
implemented is that every Win32 API function that takes a string as an
argument actually maps to one of two functions which are suffixed with
an A (which stands for ANSI, and means multibyte strings) or W (which
stands for wide, and means Unicode strings). The mapping is, of
course, controlled by the same UNICODE preprocessor
constant. Generally all structures containing strings in them actually
map to one of two different kinds of structures, with either an A or a
W suffix after the structure name.

Unfortunately, not all of the implementations of the Win32 API
implement all of the functionality described above. In particular,
Windows 95 does not implement very much Unicode functionality. It does
implement functions to convert multibyte-encoded strings to and from
Unicode strings, and provides Unicode versions of certain low-level
functions like ExtTextOut(). In fact, all of the rest of the Unicode
versions of API functions are just stubs that return an
error. Conversely, all versions of Windows NT completely implement all
the Unicode functionality, but some versions (especially versions
before Windows NT 4.0) don't implement much of the multibyte
functionality. For this reason, as well as for general code
cleanliness, XEmacs needs to be written in such a way that it works
with or without the UNICODE preprocessor constant being defined.

Getting XEmacs to run when all strings are Unicode primarily involves
removing any assumptions made about the size of characters. Remember
what I said earlier about how the point of conversion between
internally and externally encoded strings should occur at the point of
entry or exit into or out of a library function. With this in mind, an
externally encoded string in XEmacs can be treated simply as an
arbitrary sequence of bytes of some length which has no particular
relationship to the length of the string in the internal encoding.

Use Qnative for Unix conversion, Qmswindows_tstr for Windows ...

String constants that are to be passed directly to Win32 API functions,
such as the names of window classes, need to be bracketed in their
definition with a call to the macro XETEXT. This appropriately makes a
string of either regular or wide chars, which is to say this string may be
prepended with an L (causing it to be a wide string) depending on
XEUNICODE_P.

@node Modules for Internationalization,  , Microsoft Windows-Related Multilingual Issues, Multilingual Support
@section Modules for Internationalization
@cindex modules for internationalization
@cindex internationalization, modules for

@example
@file{mule-canna.c}
@file{mule-ccl.c}
@file{mule-charset.c}
@file{mule-charset.h}
@file{file-coding.c}
@file{file-coding.h}
@file{mule-coding.c}
@file{mule-mcpath.c}
@file{mule-mcpath.h}
@file{mule-wnnfns.c}
@file{mule.c}
@end example

These files implement the MULE (Asian-language) support.  Note that MULE
actually provides a general interface for all sorts of languages, not
just Asian languages (although they are generally the most complicated
to support).  This code is still in beta.

@file{mule-charset.*} and @file{file-coding.*} provide the heart of the
XEmacs MULE support.  @file{mule-charset.*} implements the @dfn{charset}
Lisp object type, which encapsulates a character set (an ordered one- or
two-dimensional set of characters, such as US ASCII or JISX0208 Japanese
Kanji).

@file{file-coding.*} implements the @dfn{coding-system} Lisp object
type, which encapsulates a method of converting between different
encodings.  An encoding is a representation of a stream of characters,
possibly from multiple character sets, using a stream of bytes or words,
and defines (e.g.) which escape sequences are used to specify particular
character sets, how the indices for a character are converted into bytes
(sometimes this involves setting the high bit; sometimes complicated
rearranging of the values takes place, as in the Shift-JIS encoding),
etc.  It also contains some generic coding system implementations, such
as the binary (no-conversion) coding system and a sample gzip coding system.

@file{mule-coding.c} contains the implementations of text coding systems.

@file{mule-ccl.c} provides the CCL (Code Conversion Language)
interpreter.  CCL is similar in spirit to Lisp byte code and is used to
implement converters for custom encodings.

@file{mule-canna.c} and @file{mule-wnnfns.c} implement interfaces to
external programs used to implement the Canna and WNN input methods,
respectively.  This is currently in beta.

@file{mule-mcpath.c} provides some functions to allow for pathnames
containing extended characters.  This code is fragmentary, obsolete, and
completely non-working.  Instead, @code{pathname-coding-system} is used
to specify conversions of names of files and directories.  The standard
C I/O functions like @samp{open()} are wrapped so that conversion occurs
automatically.

@file{mule.c} contains a few miscellaneous things.  It currently seems
to be unused and probably should be removed.



@example
@file{intl.c}
@end example

This provides some miscellaneous internationalization code for
implementing message translation and interfacing to the Ximp input
method.  None of this code is currently working.



@example
@file{iso-wide.h}
@end example

This contains leftover code from an earlier implementation of
Asian-language support, and is not currently used.


@node Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows, The Redisplay Mechanism, Multilingual Support, Top
@chapter Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows
@cindex consoles; devices; frames; windows
@cindex devices; frames; windows, consoles;
@cindex frames; windows, consoles; devices;
@cindex windows, consoles; devices; frames;

@menu
* Introduction to Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows::  
* Point::                       
* Window Hierarchy::            
* The Window Object::           
* Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects::  
@end menu

@node Introduction to Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows, Point, Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows, Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows
@section Introduction to Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows
@cindex consoles; devices; frames; windows, introduction to
@cindex devices; frames; windows, introduction to consoles;
@cindex frames; windows, introduction to consoles; devices;
@cindex windows, introduction to consoles; devices; frames;

A window-system window that you see on the screen is called a
@dfn{frame} in Emacs terminology.  Each frame is subdivided into one or
more non-overlapping panes, called (confusingly) @dfn{windows}.  Each
window displays the text of a buffer in it. (See above on Buffers.) Note
that buffers and windows are independent entities: Two or more windows
can be displaying the same buffer (potentially in different locations),
and a buffer can be displayed in no windows.

  A single display screen that contains one or more frames is called
a @dfn{display}.  Under most circumstances, there is only one display.
However, more than one display can exist, for example if you have
a @dfn{multi-headed} console, i.e. one with a single keyboard but
multiple displays. (Typically in such a situation, the various
displays act like one large display, in that the mouse is only
in one of them at a time, and moving the mouse off of one moves
it into another.) In some cases, the different displays will
have different characteristics, e.g. one color and one mono.

  XEmacs can display frames on multiple displays.  It can even deal
simultaneously with frames on multiple keyboards (called @dfn{consoles} in
XEmacs terminology).  Here is one case where this might be useful: You
are using XEmacs on your workstation at work, and leave it running.
Then you go home and dial in on a TTY line, and you can use the
already-running XEmacs process to display another frame on your local
TTY.

  Thus, there is a hierarchy console -> display -> frame -> window.
There is a separate Lisp object type for each of these four concepts.
Furthermore, there is logically a @dfn{selected console},
@dfn{selected display}, @dfn{selected frame}, and @dfn{selected window}.
Each of these objects is distinguished in various ways, such as being the
default object for various functions that act on objects of that type.
Note that every containing object remembers the ``selected'' object
among the objects that it contains: e.g. not only is there a selected
window, but every frame remembers the last window in it that was
selected, and changing the selected frame causes the remembered window
within it to become the selected window.  Similar relationships apply
for consoles to devices and devices to frames.

@node Point, Window Hierarchy, Introduction to Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows, Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows
@section Point
@cindex point

  Recall that every buffer has a current insertion position, called
@dfn{point}.  Now, two or more windows may be displaying the same buffer,
and the text cursor in the two windows (i.e. @code{point}) can be in
two different places.  You may ask, how can that be, since each
buffer has only one value of @code{point}?  The answer is that each window
also has a value of @code{point} that is squirreled away in it.  There
is only one selected window, and the value of ``point'' in that buffer
corresponds to that window.  When the selected window is changed
from one window to another displaying the same buffer, the old
value of @code{point} is stored into the old window's ``point'' and the
value of @code{point} from the new window is retrieved and made the
value of @code{point} in the buffer.  This means that @code{window-point}
for the selected window is potentially inaccurate, and if you
want to retrieve the correct value of @code{point} for a window,
you must special-case on the selected window and retrieve the
buffer's point instead.  This is related to why @code{save-window-excursion}
does not save the selected window's value of @code{point}.

@node Window Hierarchy, The Window Object, Point, Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows
@section Window Hierarchy
@cindex window hierarchy
@cindex hierarchy of windows

  If a frame contains multiple windows (panes), they are always created
by splitting an existing window along the horizontal or vertical axis.
Terminology is a bit confusing here: to @dfn{split a window
horizontally} means to create two side-by-side windows, i.e. to make a
@emph{vertical} cut in a window.  Likewise, to @dfn{split a window
vertically} means to create two windows, one above the other, by making
a @emph{horizontal} cut.

  If you split a window and then split again along the same axis, you
will end up with a number of panes all arranged along the same axis.
The precise way in which the splits were made should not be important,
and this is reflected internally.  Internally, all windows are arranged
in a tree, consisting of two types of windows, @dfn{combination} windows
(which have children, and are covered completely by those children) and
@dfn{leaf} windows, which have no children and are visible.  Every
combination window has two or more children, all arranged along the same
axis.  There are (logically) two subtypes of windows, depending on
whether their children are horizontally or vertically arrayed.  There is
always one root window, which is either a leaf window (if the frame
contains only one window) or a combination window (if the frame contains
more than one window).  In the latter case, the root window will have
two or more children, either horizontally or vertically arrayed, and
each of those children will be either a leaf window or another
combination window.

  Here are some rules:

@enumerate
@item
Horizontal combination windows can never have children that are
horizontal combination windows; same for vertical.

@item
Only leaf windows can be split (obviously) and this splitting does one
of two things: (a) turns the leaf window into a combination window and
creates two new leaf children, or (b) turns the leaf window into one of
the two new leaves and creates the other leaf.  Rule (1) dictates which
of these two outcomes happens.

@item
Every combination window must have at least two children.

@item
Leaf windows can never become combination windows.  They can be deleted,
however.  If this results in a violation of (3), the parent combination
window also gets deleted.

@item
All functions that accept windows must be prepared to accept combination
windows, and do something sane (e.g. signal an error if so).
Combination windows @emph{do} escape to the Lisp level.

@item
All windows have three fields governing their contents:
these are @dfn{hchild} (a list of horizontally-arrayed children),
@dfn{vchild} (a list of vertically-arrayed children), and @dfn{buffer}
(the buffer contained in a leaf window).  Exactly one of
these will be non-@code{nil}.  Remember that @dfn{horizontally-arrayed}
means ``side-by-side'' and @dfn{vertically-arrayed} means
@dfn{one above the other}.

@item
Leaf windows also have markers in their @code{start} (the
first buffer position displayed in the window) and @code{pointm}
(the window's stashed value of @code{point}---see above) fields,
while combination windows have @code{nil} in these fields.

@item
The list of children for a window is threaded through the
@code{next} and @code{prev} fields of each child window.

@item
@strong{Deleted windows can be undeleted}.  This happens as a result of
restoring a window configuration, and is unlike frames, displays, and
consoles, which, once deleted, can never be restored.  Deleting a window
does nothing except set a special @code{dead} bit to 1 and clear out the
@code{next}, @code{prev}, @code{hchild}, and @code{vchild} fields, for
GC purposes.

@item
Most frames actually have two top-level windows---one for the
minibuffer and one (the @dfn{root}) for everything else.  The modeline
(if present) separates these two.  The @code{next} field of the root
points to the minibuffer, and the @code{prev} field of the minibuffer
points to the root.  The other @code{next} and @code{prev} fields are
@code{nil}, and the frame points to both of these windows.
Minibuffer-less frames have no minibuffer window, and the @code{next}
and @code{prev} of the root window are @code{nil}.  Minibuffer-only
frames have no root window, and the @code{next} of the minibuffer window
is @code{nil} but the @code{prev} points to itself. (#### This is an
artifact that should be fixed.)
@end enumerate

@node The Window Object, Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects, Window Hierarchy, Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows
@section The Window Object
@cindex window object, the
@cindex object, the window

  Windows have the following accessible fields:

@table @code
@item frame
The frame that this window is on.

@item mini_p
Non-@code{nil} if this window is a minibuffer window.

@item buffer
The buffer that the window is displaying.  This may change often during
the life of the window.

@item dedicated
Non-@code{nil} if this window is dedicated to its buffer.

@item pointm
@cindex window point internals
This is the value of point in the current buffer when this window is
selected; when it is not selected, it retains its previous value.

@item start
The position in the buffer that is the first character to be displayed
in the window.

@item force_start
If this flag is non-@code{nil}, it says that the window has been
scrolled explicitly by the Lisp program.  This affects what the next
redisplay does if point is off the screen: instead of scrolling the
window to show the text around point, it moves point to a location that
is on the screen.

@item last_modified
The @code{modified} field of the window's buffer, as of the last time
a redisplay completed in this window.

@item last_point
The buffer's value of point, as of the last time
a redisplay completed in this window.

@item left
This is the left-hand edge of the window, measured in columns.  (The
leftmost column on the screen is @w{column 0}.)

@item top
This is the top edge of the window, measured in lines.  (The top line on
the screen is @w{line 0}.)

@item height
The height of the window, measured in lines.

@item width
The width of the window, measured in columns.

@item next
This is the window that is the next in the chain of siblings.  It is
@code{nil} in a window that is the rightmost or bottommost of a group of
siblings.

@item prev
This is the window that is the previous in the chain of siblings.  It is
@code{nil} in a window that is the leftmost or topmost of a group of
siblings.

@item parent
Internally, XEmacs arranges windows in a tree; each group of siblings has
a parent window whose area includes all the siblings.  This field points
to a window's parent.

Parent windows do not display buffers, and play little role in display
except to shape their child windows.  Emacs Lisp programs usually have
no access to the parent windows; they operate on the windows at the
leaves of the tree, which actually display buffers.

@item hscroll
This is the number of columns that the display in the window is scrolled
horizontally to the left.  Normally, this is 0.

@item use_time
This is the last time that the window was selected.  The function
@code{get-lru-window} uses this field.

@item display_table
The window's display table, or @code{nil} if none is specified for it.

@item update_mode_line
Non-@code{nil} means this window's mode line needs to be updated.

@item base_line_number
The line number of a certain position in the buffer, or @code{nil}.
This is used for displaying the line number of point in the mode line.

@item base_line_pos
The position in the buffer for which the line number is known, or
@code{nil} meaning none is known.

@item region_showing
If the region (or part of it) is highlighted in this window, this field
holds the mark position that made one end of that region.  Otherwise,
this field is @code{nil}.
@end table

@node Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects,  , The Window Object, Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows
@section Modules for the Basic Displayable Lisp Objects
@cindex modules for the basic displayable Lisp objects
@cindex displayable Lisp objects, modules for the basic
@cindex Lisp objects, modules for the basic displayable
@cindex objects, modules for the basic displayable Lisp

@example
@file{console-msw.c}
@file{console-msw.h}
@file{console-stream.c}
@file{console-stream.h}
@file{console-tty.c}
@file{console-tty.h}
@file{console-x.c}
@file{console-x.h}
@file{console.c}
@file{console.h}
@end example

These modules implement the @dfn{console} Lisp object type.  A console
contains multiple display devices, but only one keyboard and mouse.
Most of the time, a console will contain exactly one device.

@strong{This model may no longer suffice.}  The X Window System (at
least) now supports a variety of input devices, including touchscreens
and tablets, as well as the traditional keyboard and mouse, and may even
be able to support multiple instances of a single type of input device
(especially pointing devices) on a single console.

Consoles are the top of a lisp object inclusion hierarchy.  Consoles
contain devices, which contain frames, which contain windows.



@example
@file{device-msw.c}
@file{device-tty.c}
@file{device-x.c}
@file{device.c}
@file{device.h}
@end example

These modules implement the @dfn{device} Lisp object type.  This
abstracts a particular screen or connection on which frames are
displayed.  As with Lisp objects, event interfaces, and other
subsystems, the device code is separated into a generic component that
contains a standardized interface (in the form of a set of methods) onto
particular device types.

The device subsystem defines all the methods and provides method
services for not only device operations but also for the frame, window,
menubar, scrollbar, toolbar, and other displayable-object subsystems.
The reason for this is that all of these subsystems have the same
subtypes (X, TTY, NeXTstep, Microsoft Windows, etc.) as devices do.

@strong{This abstraction is probably broken} (as of late 2004), at least
for X consoles, with the advent of the @strong{Xft} library.  Xft is a
complete break from the traditional approach to text rendering in the
X11 environment, since fonts are composed of glyphs rendered by
@emph{client-side} code.  These glyphs are then transmitted to the
server as sets of trapezoids, and displayed by the @strong{XRender}
extension (where available; the X11 core protocol can also be used, but
this is slow).  The XRender extension is especially attractive because
it allows modern image composition techniques to be used to render
antialiased fonts.

By contrast, the traditional approach renders fonts on the server side
as a collection of bitmaps.  It is also possible use a @emph{font
server} that knows how to render antialiased fonts, but for some reason
this approach has never caught on.

The problem that this creates for XEmacs is that the traditional (and
still popular) widget sets, the various Athena variants and the Motif
widget set, are based on the server-side rendering model.  Thus, even if
XEmacs-specific widgets (such as the basic text window, the Lucid
menubar, and the recently added tab control) can be adapted to render
text via Xft, older widgets (such as buttons and labels) and ``modern''
widgets derived from traditional widgets (the progress gauge) still
expect their font resources to be converted to server-side fonts.  Then
text is rendered by calls to the core protocol via Xlib, rather than by
calls to the XRender protocol via Xft.

It's even possible to imagine a situation where a widget is composed of
components which draw their own text (@emph{predefined widgets}) as well
as new components which can draw using more modern methods.  Handling
this will either require reworking the Emacs face mechanism to provide a
way to determine whether this widget can use that font, or ways to give
each of several different widgets, even different components of a given
widget, a different face property.  This is already an issue, as widgets
generally derive their font from the gui-element face, but this might
not be appropriate for widgets embedded in a buffer.

There seem to be two overall ways to go.

@enumerate
@item
Add face information to the Lucid widget library, and extend the
coverage of that library to device types that aren't supported by it yet
(MS Windows, and maybe TTY).

@item
Create a lighter-weight interface, perhaps an extension of the device
interface, that allows widgets to access face information from the
device it is implemented on.
@end enumerate



@example
@file{frame-msw.c}
@file{frame-tty.c}
@file{frame-x.c}
@file{frame.c}
@file{frame.h}
@end example

Each device contains one or more frames in which objects (e.g. text) are
displayed.  A frame corresponds to a window in the window system;
usually this is a top-level window but it could potentially be one of a
number of overlapping child windows within a top-level window, using the
MDI (Multiple Document Interface) protocol in Microsoft Windows or a
similar scheme.

The @file{frame-*} files implement the @dfn{frame} Lisp object type and
provide the generic and device-type-specific operations on frames
(e.g. raising, lowering, resizing, moving, etc.).



@example
@file{window.c}
@file{window.h}
@end example

@cindex window (in Emacs)
@cindex pane
Each frame consists of one or more non-overlapping @dfn{windows} (better
known as @dfn{panes} in standard window-system terminology) in which a
buffer's text can be displayed.  Windows can also have scrollbars
displayed around their edges.

@file{window.c} and @file{window.h} implement the @dfn{window} Lisp
object type and provide code to manage windows.  Since windows have no
associated resources in the window system (the window system knows only
about the frame; no child windows or anything are used for XEmacs
windows), there is no device-type-specific code here; all of that code
is part of the redisplay mechanism or the code for particular object
types such as scrollbars.

@node The Redisplay Mechanism, Extents, Consoles; Devices; Frames; Windows, Top
@chapter The Redisplay Mechanism
@cindex redisplay mechanism, the

  The redisplay mechanism is one of the most complicated sections of
XEmacs, especially from a conceptual standpoint.  This is doubly so
because, unlike for the basic aspects of the Lisp interpreter, the
computer science theories of how to efficiently handle redisplay are not
well-developed.

  When working with the redisplay mechanism, remember the Golden Rules
of Redisplay:

@enumerate
@item
It Is Better To Be Correct Than Fast.
@item
Thou Shalt Not Run Elisp From Within Redisplay.
@item
It Is Better To Be Fast Than Not To Be.
@end enumerate

@menu
* Critical Redisplay Sections::  
* Line Start Cache::            
* Redisplay Piece by Piece::    
* Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism::  
* Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects::  
@end menu

@node Critical Redisplay Sections, Line Start Cache, The Redisplay Mechanism, The Redisplay Mechanism
@section Critical Redisplay Sections
@cindex redisplay sections, critical
@cindex critical redisplay sections


@strong{The following paragraphs are way out-of-date and inaccurate.}

Within this section, we are defenseless and assume that the
following cannot happen:

@enumerate
@item
garbage collection
@item
Lisp code evaluation
@item
frame size changes
@end enumerate

We ensure (3) by calling @code{hold_frame_size_changes()}, which
will cause any pending frame size changes to get put on hold
till after the end of the critical section.  (1) follows
automatically if (2) is met.  #### Unfortunately, there are
some places where Lisp code can be called within this section.
We need to remove them.

If @code{Fsignal()} is called during this critical section, we
will @code{abort()}.

If garbage collection is called during this critical section,
we simply return. #### We should abort instead.

#### If a frame-size change does occur we should probably
actually be preempting redisplay.

@strong{Begin up-to-date stuff}

@subsection Nasty Bugs due to Reentrancy in Redisplay Structures handling QUIT

These are now fixed as of November 10, 2004.

@subheading Crash -- reentrant @code{regenerate_window()}

Here is a crash I (ben) just got -- November 9, 2004:
It can sort of be reproduced by creating a bunch of frames, opening a bunch of
large files (which may be fontlocking for awhile). and immediately start
Alt-TAB-ing back and forth quickly and constantly scrolling up and down using
the scrolling dial on your mouse.

@example

Fatal error: assertion failed, file c:\xemacs\build\src\redisplay.c, line 5532,
!dy->locked

C backtrace:

assert_failed(const char * 0x012a4ff0 `string', int 5532, const char * 0x0127bea4 `string') line 3839
Dynarr_verify_mod_1(void * 0x023ad2b0, const char * 0x012a4ff0 `string', int 5532) line 1306 + 36 bytes
regenerate_window(window * 0x02f2ca88, long 40372, long 40372, int 2) line 5532 + 25 bytes
update_line_start_cache(window * 0x02f2ca88, long 40372, long 40401, long 40372, int 0) line 8543 + 19 bytes
point_in_line_start_cache(window * 0x02f2ca88, long 40372, int 0) line 7850 + 23 bytes
start_end_of_last_line(window * 0x02f2ca88, long 40372, int 1, int 1) line 8121 + 15 bytes
end_of_last_line_may_error(window * 0x02f2ca88, long 40372) line 8203 + 17 bytes
pixel_to_glyph_translation(frame * 0x02f2c900, int 291, int 317, int * 0x0082bb04, int * 0x0082bb00, int * 0x0082bafc, int * 0x0082baf8, window * * 0x0082bae8, long * 0x0082baf4, long * 0x0082baf0, long * 0x0082baec, long * 0x0082bb10, long * 0x0082bb0c) line 9336 + 32 bytes
mswindows_handle_mousewheel_event(long 49465600, int 0, int -240, tagPOINTS @{...@}) line 360 + 82 bytes
mswindows_wnd_proc(HWND__ * 0x00260a42, unsigned int 522, unsigned int 4279238656, long 29885130) line 3561 + 36 bytes
intercepted_wnd_proc(HWND__ * 0x00260a42, unsigned int 522, unsigned int 4279238656, long 29885130) line 2376
USER32! 77e11ef0()
USER32! 77e1204c()
USER32! 77e121af()
mswindows_drain_windows_queue(int 0) line 1330 + 9 bytes
emacs_mswindows_drain_queue() line 1339 + 7 bytes
event_stream_drain_queue() line 1785
event_stream_quit_p() line 1893
check_quit() line 938
check_what_happened() line 459
internal_equal(long 22180468, long 22180468, int 0) line 2823 + 14 bytes
update_image_instance(long 83498640, long 22180468) line 2121 + 18 bytes
image_instantiate(long 21418616, long 20663624, long 54932896, long 22180468, long 3) line 3403 + 13 bytes
va_call_trapping_problems_1(void * 0x0082cf94) line 5220 + 221 bytes
call_trapping_problems_2(long 83160440) line 4867 + 13 bytes
call_with_condition_handler(long (long, long, long)* 0x010cc4c0 flagged_a_squirmer(long, long, long), long 83160440, long (long)* 0x010cc440 call_trapping_problems_2(long), long 83160440) line 2129 + 7 bytes
call_trapping_problems_1(long 83160440) line 4874 + 23 bytes
internal_catch(long 21399864, long (long)* 0x010cc490 call_trapping_problems_1(long), long 83160440, int * volatile 0x0082ce4c, long * volatile 0x0082ce54) line 1527 + 7 bytes
call_trapping_problems(long 20908160, const char * 0x00000000, int 98315, call_trapping_problems_result * 0x00000000, long (void *)* 0x010cca30 va_call_trapping_problems_1(void *), void * 0x0082cf94) line 5147 + 32 bytes
call_with_suspended_errors(long (void)* 0x011448c0 image_instantiate(long, long, long, long, long), long 20663624, long 20908160, _error_behavior_struct_ @{...@}, int 5) line 5314 + 26 bytes
specifier_instance_from_inst_list(long 21418616, long 20663624, long 54932896, long 21673760, _error_behavior_struct_ @{...@}, int 1, long 3) line 2501 + 54 bytes
specifier_instance(long 21418616, long 20663624, long 54932896, _error_behavior_struct_ @{...@}, int 1, int 0, long 3) line 2614 + 64 bytes
glyph_image_instance(long 22692176, long 54932896, _error_behavior_struct_ @{...@}, int 1) line 3955 + 31 bytes
add_glyph_rune(position_redisplay_data_type * 0x0082d52c, glyph_block * 0x0082d454, int 0, int 0, glyph_cachel * 0x04f4e518) line 1972 + 26 bytes
create_text_block(window * 0x034635a0, display_line * 0x033bfb28, long 29860, prop_block_dynarr * * 0x0082d7b8, int 2) line 2827 + 30 bytes
generate_display_line(window * 0x034635a0, display_line * 0x033bfb28, int 1, long 29860, prop_block_dynarr * * 0x0082d7b8, int 2) line 979 + 38 bytes
regenerate_window(window * 0x034635a0, long 29860, long 25012, int 2) line 5607 + 30 bytes
update_line_start_cache(window * 0x034635a0, long 25012, long 28767, long 25012, int 0) line 8614 + 19 bytes
point_in_line_start_cache(window * 0x034635a0, long 25012, int 0) line 7850 + 23 bytes
start_end_of_last_line(window * 0x034635a0, long 25012, int 1, int 0) line 8121 + 15 bytes
end_of_last_line(window * 0x034635a0, long 25012) line 8197 + 17 bytes
Fwindow_end(long 54932896, long 20926544) line 1848 + 13 bytes
Ffuncall(int 3, long * 0x0082dbb8) line 3841 + 93 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x032ceee8, int 7, long * 0x03289f40) line 823 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 52991916, int 1, long * 0x0082dfb0) line 3454 + 85 bytes
Ffuncall(int 2, long * 0x0082dfac) line 3880 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x02f667d8, int 6, long * 0x01558748) line 823 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 22579576, int 3, long * 0x0082e3ac) line 3454 + 85 bytes
Ffuncall(int 4, long * 0x0082e3a8) line 3880 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x03209c98, int 5, long * 0x03288c68) line 823 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 51656320, int 1, long * 0x0082e7a4) line 3454 + 85 bytes
Ffuncall(int 2, long * 0x0082e7a0) line 3880 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x0082e9ec, int 4, long * 0x03224990) line 823 + 16 bytes
Fbyte_code(long 37927380, long 52578688, long 9) line 2564 + 70 bytes
Feval(long 51505420) line 3601 + 187 bytes
internal_catch(long 51959412, long (long)* 0x010c6f40 Feval(long), long 51505420, int * volatile 0x00000000, long * volatile 0x00000000) line 1527 + 7 bytes
execute_rare_opcode(long * 0x0082eee8, const unsigned char * 0x03248365, Opcode Bcatch) line 1380 + 24 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x03248340, int 2, long * 0x02f3c0a0) line 715 + 17 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 51656276, int 0, long * 0x0082f444) line 3454 + 85 bytes
Ffuncall(int 1, long * 0x0082f440) line 3880 + 17 bytes
run_hook_with_args_in_buffer(buffer * 0x04ee9060, int 1, long * 0x0082f440, run_hooks_condition RUN_HOOKS_TO_COMPLETION) line 4361 + 13 bytes
run_hook_with_args(int 1, long * 0x0082f440, run_hooks_condition RUN_HOOKS_TO_COMPLETION) line 4374 + 23 bytes
run_hook(long 51959028) line 4443 + 13 bytes
safe_run_hook_trapping_problems_1(void * 0x013c73c0) line 5517 + 9 bytes
call_trapping_problems_2(long 83157920) line 4867 + 13 bytes
call_with_condition_handler(long (long, long, long)* 0x010cc4c0 flagged_a_squirmer(long, long, long), long 83157920, long (long)* 0x010cc440 call_trapping_problems_2(long), long 83157920) line 2129 + 7 bytes
call_trapping_problems_1(long 83157920) line 4874 + 23 bytes
internal_catch(long 21399864, long (long)* 0x010cc490 call_trapping_problems_1(long), long 83157920, int * volatile 0x0082f700, long * volatile 0x0082f708) line 1527 + 7 bytes
call_trapping_problems(long 20925944, const char * 0x00000000, int 131235, call_trapping_problems_result * 0x0082f830, long (void *)* 0x010cd990 safe_run_hook_trapping_problems_1(void *), void * 0x013c73c0) line 5147 + 32 bytes
safe_run_hook_trapping_problems(long 20741312, long 20739008, int 160) line 5543 + 36 bytes
run_pre_idle_hook() line 2084 + 24 bytes
redisplay() line 7224
Fnext_event(long 37363732, long 20928056) line 2263
Fcommand_loop_1() line 600 + 15 bytes
command_loop_1(long 20928056) line 512
condition_case_1(long 20925944, long (long)* 0x01096a80 command_loop_1(long), long 20928056, long (long, long)* 0x01096630 cmd_error(long, long), long 20928056) line 1918 + 7 bytes
command_loop_3() line 262 + 35 bytes
command_loop_2(long 20928056) line 277
internal_catch(long 20683712, long (long)* 0x010967a0 command_loop_2(long), long 20928056, int * volatile 0x00000000, long * volatile 0x00000000) line 1527 + 7 bytes
initial_command_loop(long 20928056) line 313 + 28 bytes
xemacs_21_5_b18_i586_pc_win32(int 1, unsigned short * * 0x0082fed0, unsigned short * * 0x00000000, int 0) line 2551
main(int 1, char * * 0x00e52610, char * * 0x00e52bb0) line 2992
mainCRTStartup() line 338 + 17 bytes
KERNEL32! 7c59893d()

Lisp backtrace:

  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (catch #<INTERNAL OBJECT (XEmacs bug?) (opaque, size=0) 0x1468938> ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # bind (inhibit-quit)
  window-end(#<window on "signal.c<2>" 0x5e4a> t)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # bind (buffer we-are-screwed check-text-props window)
  lazy-lock-fontify-window(#<window on "signal.c<2>" 0x5e4a>)
  # bind (walk-windows-current walk-windows-start arg which-devices which-frames
 minibuf function)
  walk-windows(lazy-lock-fontify-window no-minibuf #<mswindows-frame "emacs" 0x5
e49>)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # bind (ssf65112 tick frame)
  lazy-lock-maybe-fontify-frame(#<mswindows-frame "emacs" 0x5e49>)
  # bind (frame starting-frame)
  byte-code("..." [starting-frame frame selected-frame frame-visible-p frame-min
ibuffer-only-p next-frame visible-nomini throw lazy-lock-frame-loop-done t lazy-
lock-maybe-fontify-frame] 4)
  # (catch lazy-lock-frame-loop-done ...)
  lazy-lock-pre-idle-fontify-windows()
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (catch #<INTERNAL OBJECT (XEmacs bug?) (opaque, size=0) 0x1468938> ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # bind (inhibit-quit)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # bind (inhibit-quit)
  (next-event "[internal]")
  # (condition-case ... . error)
  # (catch top-level ...)
@end example

@subsubheading Another Lisp trace of a similar situation (C stack trace not available):

@example
Fatal error: assertion failed, file c:\xemacs\build\src\redisplay.c, line 5532,
!dy->locked

Lisp backtrace follows:

  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  scrollbar-page-down((#<window on "*grep*" 0x1a5f9>))
  (dispatch-event "[internal]")
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (catch #<INTERNAL OBJECT (XEmacs bug?) (opaque, size=0) 0x1468270> ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (catch #<INTERNAL OBJECT (XEmacs bug?) (opaque, size=0) 0x1468270> ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # bind (inhibit-quit)
  window-end(#<window on "*grep*" 0x1a5f9> t)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # bind (buffer we-are-screwed check-text-props window)
  lazy-lock-fontify-window(#<window on "*grep*" 0x1a5f9>)
  # bind (walk-windows-current walk-windows-start arg which-devices which-frames
 minibuf function)
  walk-windows(lazy-lock-fontify-window no-minibuf #<mswindows-frame "emacs" 0x1
9f64>)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # bind (ssf65112 tick frame)
  lazy-lock-maybe-fontify-frame(#<mswindows-frame "emacs" 0x19f64>)
  # bind (frame starting-frame)
  byte-code("..." [starting-frame frame selected-frame frame-visible-p frame-min
ibuffer-only-p next-frame visible-nomini throw lazy-lock-frame-loop-done t lazy-
lock-maybe-fontify-frame] 4)
  # (catch lazy-lock-frame-loop-done ...)
  lazy-lock-pre-idle-fontify-windows()
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (catch #<INTERNAL OBJECT (XEmacs bug?) (opaque, size=0) 0x1468270> ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # bind (inhibit-quit)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # (unwind-protect ...)
  # bind (inhibit-quit)
  (next-event "[internal]")
  # (condition-case ... . error)
  # (catch top-level ...)
@end example

@subheading Crash -- reentrant @code{generate_displayable_area()}

Original code said [Tricky tricky tricky.
@code{generate_displayable_area()} can (could) be called reentrantly,
and redisplay is not prepared to handle this:].

assert_failed(const char * 0x0129c8c8 `string', int 5328, const char * 0x01274068 `string') line 3620
Dynarr_verify_mod_1(void * 0x0250f228, const char * 0x0129c8c8 `string', int 5328) line 1256 + 36 bytes
generate_displayable_area(window * 0x02480028, long 38776292, int 0, int 0, int 265, int 169, display_line_dynarr * 0x0250f228, long 0, int 2) line 5328 + 25 bytes
output_gutter(frame * 0x0228ad90, gutter_pos TOP_GUTTER, int 1) line 409 + 69 bytes
redraw_exposed_gutter(frame * 0x0228ad90, gutter_pos TOP_GUTTER, int 8, int 23, int 249, int 127) line 687 + 15 bytes
redraw_exposed_gutters(frame * 0x0228ad90, int 8, int 23, int 249, int 127) line 703 + 29 bytes
mswindows_redraw_exposed_area(frame * 0x0228ad90, int 8, int 23, int 249, int 127) line 862 + 25 bytes
mswindows_handle_paint(frame * 0x0228ad90) line 2176 + 25 bytes
mswindows_wnd_proc(HWND__ * 0x001003e2, unsigned int 15, unsigned int 0, long 0) line 3233 + 45 bytes
intercepted_wnd_proc(HWND__ * 0x001003e2, unsigned int 15, unsigned int 0, long 0) line 2488
USER32! 77e3a244()
USER32! 77e14730()
USER32! 77e1558a()
NTDLL! KiUserCallbackDispatcher@@12 + 19 bytes
USER32! 77e14680()
USER32! 77e1a792()
qxeIsDialogMessage(HWND__ * 0x001003e2, tagMSG * 0x0082a93c @{msg=0x0000000f wp=0x00000000 lp=0x00000000@}) line 2298 + 14 bytes
mswindows_is_dialog_msg(tagMSG * 0x0082a93c @{msg=0x0000000f wp=0x00000000 lp=0x00000000@}) line 165 + 13 bytes
mswindows_drain_windows_queue(int 0) line 1282 + 9 bytes
emacs_mswindows_drain_queue() line 1326 + 7 bytes
event_stream_drain_queue() line 1887
event_stream_quit_p() line 1992
check_quit() line 993
unbind_to_hairy(int 35) line 5963
unbind_to_1(int 35, long 20888208) line 5945 + 200 bytes
specifier_instance_from_inst_list(long 21379344, long 38135616, long 36220304, long 20888208, _error_behavior_struct_ @{...@}, int 1, long 3) line 2522 + 16 bytes
specifier_instance(long 21379344, long 38135616, long 36220304, _error_behavior_struct_ @{...@}, int 1, int 0, long 3) line 2625 + 65 bytes
specifier_instance_no_quit(long 21379344, long 38135616, long 36220304, _error_behavior_struct_ @{...@}, int 0, long 1) line 2658 + 31 bytes
face_property_matching_instance(long 22612340, long 20860632, long 22530956, long 36220304, _error_behavior_struct_ @{...@}, int 0, long 1) line 565 + 48 bytes
ensure_face_cachel_contains_charset(face_cachel * 0x0082b014, long 36220304, long 22530956) line 1104 + 35 bytes
update_face_cachel_data(face_cachel * 0x0082b014, long 36220304, long 22612340) line 1304 + 19 bytes
query_string_geometry(long 21110576, long 22612340, int * 0x00000000, int * 0x0082b5b4, int * 0x00000000, long 38852960) line 2370 + 23 bytes
mswindows_widget_query_string_geometry(long 21110576, long 22612340, int * 0x0082b5b8, int * 0x0082b5b4, long 38852960) line 2914 + 25 bytes
widget_query_string_geometry(long 21110576, long 22612340, int * 0x0082b5b8, int * 0x0082b5b4, long 38852960) line 514 + 32 bytes
edit_field_query_geometry(long 38857648, int * 0x0082b7b4, int * 0x0082b7b8, image_instance_geometry IMAGE_DESIRED_GEOMETRY, long 38852960) line 920 + 390 bytes
widget_query_geometry(long 38857648, int * 0x0082b7b4, int * 0x0082b7b8, image_instance_geometry IMAGE_DESIRED_GEOMETRY, long 38852960) line 567 + 26 bytes
image_instance_query_geometry(long 38857648, int * 0x0082b7b4, int * 0x0082b7b8, image_instance_geometry IMAGE_DESIRED_GEOMETRY, long 38852960) line 2015 + 26 bytes
glyph_query_geometry(long 38853384, int * 0x0082b7b4, int * 0x0082b7b8, image_instance_geometry IMAGE_DESIRED_GEOMETRY, long 38852960) line 4197 + 25 bytes
layout_query_geometry(long 38852960, int * 0x0082b9cc, int * 0x0082b9d0, image_instance_geometry IMAGE_DESIRED_GEOMETRY, long 38404624) line 1351 + 25 bytes
widget_query_geometry(long 38852960, int * 0x0082b9cc, int * 0x0082b9d0, image_instance_geometry IMAGE_DESIRED_GEOMETRY, long 38404624) line 567 + 26 bytes
image_instance_query_geometry(long 38852960, int * 0x0082b9cc, int * 0x0082b9d0, image_instance_geometry IMAGE_DESIRED_GEOMETRY, long 38404624) line 2015 + 26 bytes
glyph_query_geometry(long 38537976, int * 0x0082b9cc, int * 0x0082b9d0, image_instance_geometry IMAGE_DESIRED_GEOMETRY, long 38404624) line 4197 + 25 bytes
layout_layout(long 38404624, int 265, int 156, int -2, int -2, long 38273064) line 1468 + 23 bytes
widget_layout(long 38404624, int 265, int 156, int -2, int -2, long 38273064) line 626 + 30 bytes
image_instance_layout(long 38404624, int 265, int 156, int -2, int -2, long 38273064) line 2102 + 51 bytes
glyph_ascent(long 38404624, long 38273064) line 4009 + 21 bytes
update_glyph_cachel_data(window * 0x02480028, long 36201168, glyph_cachel * 0x0248c3d8) line 4272 + 13 bytes
get_glyph_cachel_index(window * 0x02480028, long 36201168) line 4306 + 17 bytes
add_glyph_rune(position_redisplay_data_type * 0x0082bf2c, glyph_block * 0x024bd028, int 0, int 0, glyph_cachel * 0x00000000) line 1800 + 15 bytes
add_glyph_runes(position_redisplay_data_type * 0x0082bf2c, int 0) line 2085 + 31 bytes
create_string_text_block(window * 0x02480028, long 38776292, display_line * 0x02514500, long 0, prop_block_dynarr * * 0x0082c13c, int 2) line 4907 + 14 bytes
generate_string_display_line(window * 0x02480028, long 38776292, display_line * 0x02514500, long 0, prop_block_dynarr * * 0x0082c13c, int 2) line 5293 + 29 bytes
generate_displayable_area(window * 0x02480028, long 38776292, int 0, int 0, int 265, int 169, display_line_dynarr * 0x0250f228, long 0, int 2) line 5372 + 29 bytes
output_gutter(frame * 0x0228ad90, gutter_pos TOP_GUTTER, int 0) line 409 + 69 bytes
update_frame_gutters(frame * 0x0228ad90) line 639 + 15 bytes
redisplay_frame(frame * 0x0228ad90, int 1) line 6792 + 9 bytes
redisplay_device(device * 0x0171df00, int 1) line 6911 + 11 bytes
redisplay_without_hooks() line 6957 + 11 bytes
redisplay_no_pre_idle_hook() line 7029
redisplay() line 7011
mswindows_wnd_proc(HWND__ * 0x001003e2, unsigned int 5, unsigned int 0, long 10223881) line 3424
intercepted_wnd_proc(HWND__ * 0x001003e2, unsigned int 5, unsigned int 0, long 10223881) line 2488
USER32! 77e3a244()
USER32! 77e16362()
USER32! 77e14c1a()
USER32! 77e1dd30()
mswindows_wnd_proc(HWND__ * 0x001003e2, unsigned int 71, unsigned int 0, long 8578308) line 3926 + 21 bytes
intercepted_wnd_proc(HWND__ * 0x001003e2, unsigned int 71, unsigned int 0, long 8578308) line 2488
USER32! 77e3a244()
USER32! 77e14730()
USER32! 77e174b4()
NTDLL! KiUserCallbackDispatcher@@12 + 19 bytes
mswindows_set_frame_size(frame * 0x0228ad90, int 265, int 156) line 355
internal_set_frame_size(frame * 0x0228ad90, int 265, int 156, int 0) line 2754 + 24 bytes
Fset_frame_displayable_pixel_size(long 36220304, long 531, long 313, long 20888208) line 3004 + 32 bytes
Ffuncall(int 4, long * 0x0082e778) line 3844 + 168 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x02286e48, int 40, long * 0x01529b80) line 609 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 22433308, int 0, long * 0x0082ec08) line 3452 + 85 bytes
Ffuncall(int 1, long * 0x0082ec04) line 3883 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x02286d40, int 6, long * 0x01548ddc) line 609 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 22505864, int 11, long * 0x0082f00c) line 3452 + 85 bytes
Ffuncall(int 12, long * 0x0082f008) line 3883 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x02503e38, int 47, long * 0x0152dc48) line 609 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 22436784, int 0, long * 0x0082f534) line 3452 + 85 bytes
Ffuncall(int 1, long * 0x0082f530) line 3883 + 17 bytes
apply1(long 22436784, long 20888208) line 4458 + 11 bytes
Fcall_interactively(long 20742816, long 20888208, long 20888208) line 460 + 13 bytes
Ffuncall(int 2, long * 0x0082f8ec) line 3844 + 127 bytes
call1(long 20854392, long 20742816) line 4489 + 11 bytes
execute_command_event(command_builder * 0x01798f98, long 24439276) line 4198 + 69 bytes
Fdispatch_event(long 24439276) line 4569 + 13 bytes
Fcommand_loop_1() line 569 + 9 bytes
command_loop_1(long 20888208) line 489
condition_case_1(long 20886024, long (long)* 0x010955a0 command_loop_1(long), long 20888208, long (long, long)* 0x01095150 cmd_error(long, long), long 20888208) line 1917 + 7 bytes
command_loop_3() line 251 + 35 bytes
command_loop_2(long 20888208) line 264
internal_catch(long 20650992, long (long)* 0x010952c0 command_loop_2(long), long 20888208, int * volatile 0x00000000, long * volatile 0x00000000) line 1527 + 7 bytes
initial_command_loop(long 20888208) line 300 + 28 bytes
xemacs_21_5_b10_i586_pc_win32(int 1, char * * 0x00e52620, char * * 0x00e52bb0, int 0) line 2356
main(int 1, char * * 0x00e52620, char * * 0x00e52bb0) line 2733
mainCRTStartup() line 338 + 17 bytes
KERNEL32! 77ea847c()

@node Line Start Cache, Redisplay Piece by Piece, Critical Redisplay Sections, The Redisplay Mechanism
@section Line Start Cache
@cindex line start cache

  The traditional scrolling code in Emacs breaks in a variable height
world.  It depends on the key assumption that the number of lines that
can be displayed at any given time is fixed.  This led to a complete
separation of the scrolling code from the redisplay code.  In order to
fully support variable height lines, the scrolling code must actually be
tightly integrated with redisplay.  Only redisplay can determine how
many lines will be displayed on a screen for any given starting point.

  What is ideally wanted is a complete list of the starting buffer
position for every possible display line of a buffer along with the
height of that display line.  Maintaining such a full list would be very
expensive.  We settle for having it include information for all areas
which we happen to generate anyhow (i.e. the region currently being
displayed) and for those areas we need to work with.

  In order to ensure that the cache accurately represents what redisplay
would actually show, it is necessary to invalidate it in many
situations.  If the buffer changes, the starting positions may no longer
be correct.  If a face or an extent has changed then the line heights
may have altered.  These events happen frequently enough that the cache
can end up being constantly disabled.  With this potentially constant
invalidation when is the cache ever useful?

  Even if the cache is invalidated before every single usage, it is
necessary.  Scrolling often requires knowledge about display lines which
are actually above or below the visible region.  The cache provides a
convenient light-weight method of storing this information for multiple
display regions.  This knowledge is necessary for the scrolling code to
always obey the First Golden Rule of Redisplay.

  If the cache already contains all of the information that the scrolling
routines happen to need so that it doesn't have to go generate it, then
we are able to obey the Third Golden Rule of Redisplay.  The first thing
we do to help out the cache is to always add the displayed region.  This
region had to be generated anyway, so the cache ends up getting the
information basically for free.  In those cases where a user is simply
scrolling around viewing a buffer there is a high probability that this
is sufficient to always provide the needed information.  The second
thing we can do is be smart about invalidating the cache.

  TODO---Be smart about invalidating the cache.  Potential places:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Insertions at end-of-line which don't cause line-wraps do not alter the
starting positions of any display lines.  These types of buffer
modifications should not invalidate the cache.  This is actually a large
optimization for redisplay speed as well.
@item
Buffer modifications frequently only affect the display of lines at and
below where they occur.  In these situations we should only invalidate
the part of the cache starting at where the modification occurs.
@end itemize

  In case you're wondering, the Second Golden Rule of Redisplay is not
applicable.

@node Redisplay Piece by Piece, Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism, Line Start Cache, The Redisplay Mechanism
@section Redisplay Piece by Piece
@cindex redisplay piece by piece

As you can begin to see redisplay is complex and also not well
documented. Chuck no longer works on XEmacs so this section is my take
on the workings of redisplay.

Redisplay happens in three phases:

@enumerate
@item
Determine desired display in area that needs redisplay.
Implemented by @code{redisplay.c}
@item
Compare desired display with current display
Implemented by @code{redisplay-output.c}
@item
Output changes Implemented by @code{redisplay-output.c},
@code{redisplay-x.c}, @code{redisplay-msw.c} and @code{redisplay-tty.c}
@end enumerate

Steps 1 and 2 are device-independent and relatively complex.  Step 3 is
mostly device-dependent.

Determining the desired display

Display attributes are stored in @code{display_line} structures. Each
@code{display_line} consists of a set of @code{display_block}'s and each
@code{display_block} contains a number of @code{rune}'s. Generally
dynarr's of @code{display_line}'s are held by each window representing
the current display and the desired display.

The @code{display_line} structures are tightly tied to buffers which
presents a problem for redisplay as this connection is bogus for the
modeline. Hence the @code{display_line} generation routines are
duplicated for generating the modeline. This means that the modeline
display code has many bugs that the standard redisplay code does not.

The guts of @code{display_line} generation are in
@code{create_text_block}, which creates a single display line for the
desired locale. This incrementally parses the characters on the current
line and generates redisplay structures for each.

Gutter redisplay is different. Because the data to display is stored in
a string we cannot use @code{create_text_block}. Instead we use
@code{create_text_string_block} which performs the same function as
@code{create_text_block} but for strings. Many of the complexities of
@code{create_text_block} to do with cursor handling and selective
display have been removed.

@node Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism, Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects, Redisplay Piece by Piece, The Redisplay Mechanism
@section Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism
@cindex modules for the redisplay mechanism
@cindex redisplay mechanism, modules for the

@example
@file{redisplay-output.c}
@file{redisplay-msw.c}
@file{redisplay-tty.c}
@file{redisplay-x.c}
@file{redisplay.c}
@file{redisplay.h}
@end example

These files provide the redisplay mechanism.  As with many other
subsystems in XEmacs, there is a clean separation between the general
and device-specific support.

@file{redisplay.c} contains the bulk of the redisplay engine.  These
functions update the redisplay structures (which describe how the screen
is to appear) to reflect any changes made to the state of any
displayable objects (buffer, frame, window, etc.) since the last time
that redisplay was called.  These functions are highly optimized to
avoid doing more work than necessary (since redisplay is called
extremely often and is potentially a huge time sink), and depend heavily
on notifications from the objects themselves that changes have occurred,
so that redisplay doesn't explicitly have to check each possible object.
The redisplay mechanism also contains a great deal of caching to further
speed things up; some of this caching is contained within the various
displayable objects.

@file{redisplay-output.c} goes through the redisplay structures and converts
them into calls to device-specific methods to actually output the screen
changes.

@file{redisplay-x.c} and @file{redisplay-tty.c} are two implementations
of these redisplay output methods, for X frames and TTY frames,
respectively.



@example
@file{indent.c}
@end example

This module contains various functions and Lisp primitives for
converting between buffer positions and screen positions.  These
functions call the redisplay mechanism to do most of the work, and then
examine the redisplay structures to get the necessary information.  This
module needs work.



@example
@file{termcap.c}
@file{terminfo.c}
@file{tparam.c}
@end example

These files contain functions for working with the termcap (BSD-style)
and terminfo (System V style) databases of terminal capabilities and
escape sequences, used when XEmacs is displaying in a TTY.



@example
@file{cm.c}
@file{cm.h}
@end example

These files provide some miscellaneous TTY-output functions and should
probably be merged into @file{redisplay-tty.c}.



@node Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects,  , Modules for the Redisplay Mechanism, The Redisplay Mechanism
@section Modules for other Display-Related Lisp Objects
@cindex modules for other display-related Lisp objects
@cindex display-related Lisp objects, modules for other
@cindex Lisp objects, modules for other display-related

@example
@file{faces.c}
@file{faces.h}
@end example



@example
@file{bitmaps.h}
@file{glyphs-eimage.c}
@file{glyphs-msw.c}
@file{glyphs-msw.h}
@file{glyphs-widget.c}
@file{glyphs-x.c}
@file{glyphs-x.h}
@file{glyphs.c}
@file{glyphs.h}
@end example



@example
@file{objects-msw.c}
@file{objects-msw.h}
@file{objects-tty.c}
@file{objects-tty.h}
@file{objects-x.c}
@file{objects-x.h}
@file{objects.c}
@file{objects.h}
@end example



@example
@file{menubar-msw.c}
@file{menubar-msw.h}
@file{menubar-x.c}
@file{menubar.c}
@file{menubar.h}
@end example



@example
@file{scrollbar-msw.c}
@file{scrollbar-msw.h}
@file{scrollbar-x.c}
@file{scrollbar-x.h}
@file{scrollbar.c}
@file{scrollbar.h}
@end example



@example
@file{toolbar-msw.c}
@file{toolbar-x.c}
@file{toolbar.c}
@file{toolbar.h}
@end example



@example
@file{font-lock.c}
@end example

This file provides C support for syntax highlighting---i.e.
highlighting different syntactic constructs of a source file in
different colors, for easy reading.  The C support is provided so that
this is fast.



@example
@file{dgif_lib.c}
@file{gif_err.c}
@file{gif_lib.h}
@file{gifalloc.c}
@end example

These modules decode GIF-format image files, for use with glyphs.
These files were removed due to Unisys patent infringement concerns.


@node Extents, Faces, The Redisplay Mechanism, Top
@chapter Extents
@cindex extents

@menu
* Introduction to Extents::     Extents are ranges over text, with properties.
* Extent Ordering::             How extents are ordered internally.
* Format of the Extent Info::   The extent information in a buffer or string.
* Zero-Length Extents::         A weird special case.
* Mathematics of Extent Ordering::  A rigorous foundation.
* Extent Fragments::            Cached information useful for redisplay.
@end menu

@node Introduction to Extents, Extent Ordering, Extents, Extents
@section Introduction to Extents
@cindex extents, introduction to

  Extents are regions over a buffer, with a start and an end position
denoting the region of the buffer included in the extent.  In
addition, either end can be closed or open, meaning that the endpoint
is or is not logically included in the extent.  Insertion of a character
at a closed endpoint causes the character to go inside the extent;
insertion at an open endpoint causes the character to go outside.

  Extent endpoints are stored using memory indices (see @file{insdel.c}),
to minimize the amount of adjusting that needs to be done when
characters are inserted or deleted.

  (Formerly, extent endpoints at the gap could be either before or
after the gap, depending on the open/closedness of the endpoint.
The intent of this was to make it so that insertions would
automatically go inside or out of extents as necessary with no
further work needing to be done.  It didn't work out that way,
however, and just ended up complexifying and buggifying all the
rest of the code.)

@node Extent Ordering, Format of the Extent Info, Introduction to Extents, Extents
@section Extent Ordering
@cindex extent ordering

  Extents are compared using memory indices.  There are two orderings
for extents and both orders are kept current at all times.  The normal
or @dfn{display} order is as follows:

@example
Extent A is ``less than'' extent B,
that is, earlier in the display order,
  if:    A-start < B-start,
  or if: A-start = B-start, and A-end > B-end
@end example

  So if two extents begin at the same position, the larger of them is the
earlier one in the display order (@code{EXTENT_LESS} is true).

  For the e-order, the same thing holds:

@example
Extent A is ``less than'' extent B in e-order,
that is, later in the buffer,
  if:    A-end < B-end,
  or if: A-end = B-end, and A-start > B-start
@end example

  So if two extents end at the same position, the smaller of them is the
earlier one in the e-order (@code{EXTENT_E_LESS} is true).

  The display order and the e-order are complementary orders: any
theorem about the display order also applies to the e-order if you swap
all occurrences of ``display order'' and ``e-order'', ``less than'' and
``greater than'', and ``extent start'' and ``extent end''.

@node Format of the Extent Info, Zero-Length Extents, Extent Ordering, Extents
@section Format of the Extent Info
@cindex extent info, format of the

  An extent-info structure consists of a list of the buffer or string's
extents and a @dfn{stack of extents} that lists all of the extents over
a particular position.  The stack-of-extents info is used for
optimization purposes---it basically caches some info that might
be expensive to compute.  Certain otherwise hard computations are easy
given the stack of extents over a particular position, and if the
stack of extents over a nearby position is known (because it was
calculated at some prior point in time), it's easy to move the stack
of extents to the proper position.

  Given that the stack of extents is an optimization, and given that
it requires memory, a string's stack of extents is wiped out each
time a garbage collection occurs.  Therefore, any time you retrieve
the stack of extents, it might not be there.  If you need it to
be there, use the @code{_force} version.

  Similarly, a string may or may not have an extent_info structure.
(Generally it won't if there haven't been any extents added to the
string.) So use the @code{_force} version if you need the extent_info
structure to be there.

  A list of extents is maintained as a double gap array.  One gap array
is ordered by start index (the @dfn{display order}) and the other is
ordered by end index (the @dfn{e-order}).  Note that positions in an
extent list should logically be conceived of as referring @emph{to} a
particular extent (as is the norm in programs) rather than sitting
between two extents.  Note also that callers of these functions should
not be aware of the fact that the extent list is implemented as an
array, except for the fact that positions are integers (this should be
generalized to handle integers and linked list equally well).

A gap array is the same structure used by buffer text: an array of
elements with a "gap" somewhere in the middle.  Insertion and deletion
happens by moving the gap to the insertion/deletion point, and then
expanding/contracting as necessary.  Gap arrays have a number of
useful properties:

@enumerate
@item
They are space efficient, as there is no need for next/previous pointers.

@item
If the items in them are sorted, locating an item is fast -- @math{O(log N)}.

@item
Insertion and deletion is very fast (constant time, essentially) if the
gap is near (which favors localized operations, as will usually be the
case).  Even if not, it requires only a block move of memory, which is
generally a highly optimized operation on modern processors.

@item
Code to manipulate them is relatively simple to write.
@end enumerate

An alternative would be balanced binary trees, which have guaranteed
@math{O(log N)} time for all operations (although the constant factors
are not as good, and repeated localized operations will be slower than
for a gap array).  Such code is quite tricky to write, however.

@node Zero-Length Extents, Mathematics of Extent Ordering, Format of the Extent Info, Extents
@section Zero-Length Extents
@cindex zero-length extents
@cindex extents, zero-length

  Extents can be zero-length, and will end up that way if their endpoints
are explicitly set that way or if their detachable property is @code{nil}
and all the text in the extent is deleted. (The exception is open-open
zero-length extents, which are barred from existing because there is
no sensible way to define their properties.  Deletion of the text in
an open-open extent causes it to be converted into a closed-open
extent.)  Zero-length extents are primarily used to represent
annotations, and behave as follows:

@enumerate
@item
Insertion at the position of a zero-length extent expands the extent
if both endpoints are closed; goes after the extent if it is closed-open;
and goes before the extent if it is open-closed.

@item
Deletion of a character on a side of a zero-length extent whose
corresponding endpoint is closed causes the extent to be detached if
it is detachable; if the extent is not detachable or the corresponding
endpoint is open, the extent remains in the buffer, moving as necessary.
@end enumerate

  Note that closed-open, non-detachable zero-length extents behave
exactly like markers and that open-closed, non-detachable zero-length
extents behave like the ``point-type'' marker in Mule.

@node Mathematics of Extent Ordering, Extent Fragments, Zero-Length Extents, Extents
@section Mathematics of Extent Ordering
@cindex mathematics of extent ordering
@cindex extent mathematics
@cindex extent ordering

@cindex display order of extents
@cindex extents, display order
  The extents in a buffer are ordered by ``display order'' because that
is that order that the redisplay mechanism needs to process them in.
The e-order is an auxiliary ordering used to facilitate operations
over extents.  The operations that can be performed on the ordered
list of extents in a buffer are

@enumerate
@item
Locate where an extent would go if inserted into the list.
@item
Insert an extent into the list.
@item
Remove an extent from the list.
@item
Map over all the extents that overlap a range.
@end enumerate

  (4) requires being able to determine the first and last extents
that overlap a range.

  NOTE: @dfn{overlap} is used as follows:

@itemize @bullet
@item
two ranges overlap if they have at least one point in common.
Whether the endpoints are open or closed makes a difference here.
@item
a point overlaps a range if the point is contained within the
range; this is equivalent to treating a point @math{P} as the range
@math{[P, P]}.
@item
In the case of an @emph{extent} overlapping a point or range, the extent
is normally treated as having closed endpoints.  This applies
consistently in the discussion of stacks of extents and such below.
Note that this definition of overlap is not necessarily consistent with
the extents that @code{map-extents} maps over, since @code{map-extents}
sometimes pays attention to whether the endpoints of an extents are open
or closed.  But for our purposes, it greatly simplifies things to treat
all extents as having closed endpoints.
@end itemize

First, define @math{>}, @math{<}, @math{<=}, etc. as applied to extents
to mean comparison according to the display order.  Comparison between
an extent @math{E} and an index @math{I} means comparison between
@math{E} and the range @math{[I, I]}.

Also define @math{e>}, @math{e<}, @math{e<=}, etc. to mean comparison
according to the e-order.

For any range @math{R}, define @math{R(0)} to be the starting index of
the range and @math{R(1)} to be the ending index of the range.

For any extent @math{E}, define @math{E(next)} to be the extent directly
following @math{E}, and @math{E(prev)} to be the extent directly
preceding @math{E}.  Assume @math{E(next)} and @math{E(prev)} can be
determined from @math{E} in constant time.  (This is because we store
the extent list as a doubly linked list.)

Similarly, define @math{E(e-next)} and @math{E(e-prev)} to be the
extents directly following and preceding @math{E} in the e-order.

Now:

Let @math{R} be a range.
Let @math{F} be the first extent overlapping @math{R}.
Let @math{L} be the last extent overlapping @math{R}.

Theorem 1: @math{R(1)} lies between @math{L} and @math{L(next)},
i.e. @math{L <= R(1) < L(next)}.

  This follows easily from the definition of display order.  The
basic reason that this theorem applies is that the display order
sorts by increasing starting index.

  Therefore, we can determine @math{L} just by looking at where we would
insert @math{R(1)} into the list, and if we know @math{F} and are moving
forward over extents, we can easily determine when we've hit @math{L} by
comparing the extent we're at to @math{R(1)}.

@example
Theorem 2: @math{F(e-prev) e< [1, R(0)] e<= F}.
@end example

  This is the analog of Theorem 1, and applies because the e-order
sorts by increasing ending index.

  Therefore, @math{F} can be found in the same amount of time as
operation (1), i.e. the time that it takes to locate where an extent
would go if inserted into the e-order list.  This is @math{O(log N)},
since we are using gap arrays to manage extents.

  Define a @dfn{stack of extents} (or @dfn{SOE}) as the set of extents
(ordered in display order and e-order, just like for normal extent
lists) that overlap an index @math{I}.

Now:

Let @math{I} be an index, let @math{S} be the stack of extents on
@math{I} and let @math{F} be the first extent in @math{S}.

Theorem 3: The first extent in @math{S} is the first extent that overlaps
any range @math{[I, J]}.

Proof: Any extent that overlaps @math{[I, J]} but does not include
@math{I} must have a start index @math{> I}, and thus be greater than
any extent in @math{S}.

Therefore, finding the first extent that overlaps a range @math{R} is
the same as finding the first extent that overlaps @math{R(0)}.

Theorem 4: Let @math{I2} be an index such that @math{I2 > I}, and let
@math{F2} be the first extent that overlaps @math{I2}.  Then, either
@math{F2} is in @math{S} or @math{F2} is greater than any extent in
@math{S}.

Proof: If @math{F2} does not include @math{I} then its start index is
greater than @math{I} and thus it is greater than any extent in
@math{S}, including @math{F}.  Otherwise, @math{F2} includes @math{I}
and thus is in @math{S}, and thus @math{F2 >= F}.

@node Extent Fragments,  , Mathematics of Extent Ordering, Extents
@section Extent Fragments
@cindex extent fragments
@cindex fragments, extent

  Imagine that the buffer is divided up into contiguous, non-overlapping
@dfn{runs} of text such that no extent starts or ends within a run
(extents that abut the run don't count).

  An extent fragment is a structure that holds data about the run that
contains a particular buffer position (if the buffer position is at the
junction of two runs, the run after the position is used)---the
beginning and end of the run, a list of all of the extents in that run,
the @dfn{merged face} that results from merging all of the faces
corresponding to those extents, the begin and end glyphs at the
beginning of the run, etc.  This is the information that redisplay needs
in order to display this run.

  Extent fragments have to be very quick to update to a new buffer
position when moving linearly through the buffer.  They rely on the
stack-of-extents code, which does the heavy-duty algorithmic work of
determining which extents overly a particular position.

@node Faces, Glyphs, Extents, Top
@chapter Faces
@cindex faces

Not yet documented.

@node Glyphs, Specifiers, Faces, Top
@chapter Glyphs
@cindex glyphs

Glyphs are graphical elements that can be displayed in XEmacs buffers or
gutters. We use the term graphical element here in the broadest possible
sense since glyphs can be as mundane as text or as arcane as a native
tab widget.

In XEmacs, glyphs represent the uninstantiated state of graphical
elements, i.e. they hold all the information necessary to produce an
image on-screen but the image need not exist at this stage, and multiple
screen images can be instantiated from a single glyph.

@c #### find a place for this discussion
@c The decision to make image specifiers a separate type is debatable.
@c In fact, the design decision to create a separate image specifier
@c type, rather than make glyphs themselves be specifiers, is
@c debatable---the other properties of glyphs are rarely used and could
@c conceivably have been incorporated into the glyph's instantiator.
@c The rarely used glyph types (buffer, pointer, icon) could also have
@c been incorporated into the instantiator.

Glyphs are lazily instantiated by calling one of the glyph
functions. This usually occurs within redisplay when
@code{Fglyph_height} is called. Instantiation causes an image-instance
to be created and cached. This cache is on a per-device basis for all glyphs
except widget-glyphs, and on a per-window basis for widgets-glyphs.  The
caching is done by @code{image_instantiate} and is necessary because it
is generally possible to display an image-instance in multiple
domains. For instance if we create a Pixmap, we can actually display
this on multiple windows - even though we only need a single Pixmap
instance to do this. If caching wasn't done then it would be necessary
to create image-instances for every displayable occurrence of a glyph -
and every usage - and this would be extremely memory and cpu intensive.

Widget-glyphs (a.k.a native widgets) are not cached in this way. This is
because widget-glyph image-instances on screen are toolkit windows, and
thus cannot be reused in multiple XEmacs domains. Thus widget-glyphs are
cached on an XEmacs window basis.  

Any action on a glyph first consults the cache before actually
instantiating a widget.

@section Glyph Instantiation
@cindex glyph instantiation
@cindex instantiation, glyph

Glyph instantiation is a hairy topic and requires some explanation. The
guts of glyph instantiation is contained within
@code{image_instantiate}. A glyph contains an image which is a
specifier. When a glyph function - for instance @code{Fglyph_height} -
asks for a property of the glyph that can only be determined from its
instantiated state, then the glyph image is instantiated and an image
instance created. The instantiation process is governed by the specifier
code and goes through a series of steps:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Validation. Instantiation of image instances happens dynamically - often
within the guts of redisplay. Thus it is often not feasible to catch
instantiator errors at instantiation time. Instead the instantiator is
validated at the time it is added to the image specifier. This function
is defined by @code{image_validate} and at a simple level validates
keyword value pairs.
@item
Duplication. The specifier code by default takes a copy of the
instantiator. This is reasonable for most specifiers but in the case of
widget-glyphs can be problematic, since some of the properties in the
instantiator - for instance callbacks - could cause infinite recursion
in the copying process. Thus the image code defines a function -
@code{image_copy_instantiator} - which will selectively copy values.
This is controlled by the way that a keyword is defined either using
@code{IIFORMAT_VALID_KEYWORD} or
@code{IIFORMAT_VALID_NONCOPY_KEYWORD}. Note that the image caching and
redisplay code relies on instantiator copying to ensure that current and
new instantiators are actually different rather than referring to the
same thing.
@item
Normalization. Once the instantiator has been copied it must be
converted into a form that is viable at instantiation time. This can
involve no changes at all, but typically involves things like converting
file names to the actual data. This function is defined by
@code{image_going_to_add} and @code{normalize_image_instantiator}.
@item
Instantiation. When an image instance is actually required for display
it is instantiated using @code{image_instantiate}. This involves calling
instantiate methods that are specific to the type of image being
instantiated.
@end itemize

The final instantiation phase also involves a number of steps. In order
to understand these we need to describe a number of concepts.

An image is instantiated in a @dfn{domain}, where a domain can be any
one of a device, frame, window or image-instance. The domain gives the
image-instance context and identity and properties that affect the
appearance of the image-instance may be different for the same glyph
instantiated in different domains. An example is the face used to
display the image-instance.

Although an image is instantiated in a particular domain the
instantiation domain is not necessarily the domain in which the
image-instance is cached. For example a pixmap can be instantiated in a
window be actually be cached on a per-device basis. The domain in which
the image-instance is actually cached is called the
@dfn{governing-domain}. A governing-domain is currently either a device
or a window. Widget-glyphs and text-glyphs have a window as a
governing-domain, all other image-instances have a device as the
governing-domain. The governing domain for an image-instance is
determined using the governing_domain image-instance method.

@section Widget-Glyphs
@cindex widget-glyphs

@section Widget-Glyphs in the MS-Windows Environment
@cindex widget-glyphs in the MS-Windows environment
@cindex MS-Windows environment, widget-glyphs in the

To Do

@section Widget-Glyphs in the X Environment
@cindex widget-glyphs in the X environment
@cindex X environment, widget-glyphs in the

Widget-glyphs under X make heavy use of lwlib (@pxref{Lucid Widget
Library}) for manipulating the native toolkit objects. This is primarily
so that different toolkits can be supported for widget-glyphs, just as
they are supported for features such as menubars etc.

Lwlib is extremely poorly documented and quite hairy so here is my
understanding of what goes on.

Lwlib maintains a set of widget_instances which mirror the hierarchical
state of Xt widgets. I think this is so that widgets can be updated and
manipulated generically by the lwlib library. For instance
update_one_widget_instance can cope with multiple types of widget and
multiple types of toolkit. Each element in the widget hierarchy is updated
from its corresponding widget_instance by walking the widget_instance
tree recursively.

This has desirable properties such as lw_modify_all_widgets which is
called from @file{glyphs-x.c} and updates all the properties of a widget
without having to know what the widget is or what toolkit it is from.
Unfortunately this also has hairy properties such as making the lwlib
code quite complex. And of course lwlib has to know at some level what
the widget is and how to set its properties.

@node Specifiers, Menus, Glyphs, Top
@chapter Specifiers
@cindex specifiers

Not yet documented.

Specifiers are documented in depth in the Lisp Reference manual.
@xref{Specifiers,,, lispref, XEmacs Lisp Reference Manual}.  The code in
@file{specifier.c} is pretty straightforward.

@node Menus, Events and the Event Loop, Specifiers, Top
@chapter Menus
@cindex menus

  A menu is set by setting the value of the variable
@code{current-menubar} (which may be buffer-local) and then calling
@code{set-menubar-dirty-flag} to signal a change.  This will cause the
menu to be redrawn at the next redisplay.  The format of the data in
@code{current-menubar} is described in @file{menubar.c}.

  Internally the data in current-menubar is parsed into a tree of
@code{widget_value's} (defined in @file{lwlib.h}); this is accomplished
by the recursive function @code{menu_item_descriptor_to_widget_value()},
called by @code{compute_menubar_data()}.  Such a tree is deallocated
using @code{free_widget_value()}.

  @code{update_screen_menubars()} is one of the external entry points.
This checks to see, for each screen, if that screen's menubar needs to
be updated.  This is the case if

@enumerate
@item
@code{set-menubar-dirty-flag} was called since the last redisplay.  (This
function sets the C variable menubar_has_changed.)
@item
The buffer displayed in the screen has changed.
@item
The screen has no menubar currently displayed.
@end enumerate

  @code{set_screen_menubar()} is called for each such screen.  This
function calls @code{compute_menubar_data()} to create the tree of
widget_value's, then calls @code{lw_create_widget()},
@code{lw_modify_all_widgets()}, and/or @code{lw_destroy_all_widgets()}
to create the X-Toolkit widget associated with the menu.

  @code{update_psheets()}, the other external entry point, actually
changes the menus being displayed.  It uses the widgets fixed by
@code{update_screen_menubars()} and calls various X functions to ensure
that the menus are displayed properly.

  The menubar widget is set up so that @code{pre_activate_callback()} is
called when the menu is first selected (i.e. mouse button goes down),
and @code{menubar_selection_callback()} is called when an item is
selected.  @code{pre_activate_callback()} calls the function in
activate-menubar-hook, which can change the menubar (this is described
in @file{menubar.c}).  If the menubar is changed,
@code{set_screen_menubars()} is called.
@code{menubar_selection_callback()} enqueues a menu event, putting in it
a function to call (either @code{eval} or @code{call-interactively}) and
its argument, which is the callback function or form given in the menu's
description.

@node Events and the Event Loop, Asynchronous Events; Quit Checking, Menus, Top
@chapter Events and the Event Loop
@cindex events and the event loop
@cindex event loop, events and the

@menu
* Introduction to Events::      
* Main Loop::                   
* Specifics of the Event Gathering Mechanism::  
* Specifics About the Emacs Event::  
* Event Queues::                
* Event Stream Callback Routines::  
* Other Event Loop Functions::  
* Stream Pairs::                
* Converting Events::           
* Dispatching Events; The Command Builder::  
* Focus Handling::              
* Editor-Level Control Flow Modules::  
@end menu

@node Introduction to Events, Main Loop, Events and the Event Loop, Events and the Event Loop
@section Introduction to Events
@cindex events, introduction to

  An event is an object that encapsulates information about an
interesting occurrence in the operating system.  Events are
generated either by user action, direct (e.g. typing on the
keyboard or moving the mouse) or indirect (moving another
window, thereby generating an expose event on an Emacs frame),
or as a result of some other typically asynchronous action happening,
such as output from a subprocess being ready or a timer expiring.
Events come into the system in an asynchronous fashion (typically
through a callback being called) and are converted into a
synchronous event queue (first-in, first-out) in a process that
we will call @dfn{collection}.

  Note that each application has its own event queue. (It is
immaterial whether the collection process directly puts the
events in the proper application's queue, or puts them into
a single system queue, which is later split up.)

  The most basic level of event collection is done by the
operating system or window system.  Typically, XEmacs does
its own event collection as well.  Often there are multiple
layers of collection in XEmacs, with events from various
sources being collected into a queue, which is then combined
with other sources to go into another queue (i.e. a second
level of collection), with perhaps another level on top of
this, etc.

  XEmacs has its own types of events (called @dfn{Emacs events}),
which provides an abstract layer on top of the system-dependent
nature of the most basic events that are received.  Part of the
complex nature of the XEmacs event collection process involves
converting from the operating-system events into the proper
Emacs events---there may not be a one-to-one correspondence.

  Emacs events are documented in @file{events.h}; I'll discuss them
later.

@node Main Loop, Specifics of the Event Gathering Mechanism, Introduction to Events, Events and the Event Loop
@section Main Loop
@cindex main loop
@cindex events, main loop

  The @dfn{command loop} is the top-level loop that the editor is always
running.  It loops endlessly, calling @code{next-event} to retrieve an
event and @code{dispatch-event} to execute it. @code{dispatch-event} does
the appropriate thing with non-user events (process, timeout,
magic, eval, mouse motion); this involves calling a Lisp handler
function, redrawing a newly-exposed part of a frame, reading
subprocess output, etc.  For user events, @code{dispatch-event}
looks up the event in relevant keymaps or menubars; when a
full key sequence or menubar selection is reached, the appropriate
function is executed. @code{dispatch-event} may have to keep state
across calls; this is done in the ``command-builder'' structure
associated with each console (remember, there's usually only
one console), and the engine that looks up keystrokes and
constructs full key sequences is called the @dfn{command builder}.
This is documented elsewhere.

  The guts of the command loop are in @code{command_loop_1()}.  This
function doesn't catch errors, though---that's the job of
@code{command_loop_2()}, which is a condition-case (i.e. error-trapping)
wrapper around @code{command_loop_1()}.  @code{command_loop_1()} never
returns, but may get thrown out of.

  When an error occurs, @code{cmd_error()} is called, which usually
invokes the Lisp error handler in @code{command-error}; however, a
default error handler is provided if @code{command-error} is @code{nil}
(e.g. during startup).  The purpose of the error handler is simply to
display the error message and do associated cleanup; it does not need to
throw anywhere.  When the error handler finishes, the condition-case in
@code{command_loop_2()} will finish and @code{command_loop_2()} will
reinvoke @code{command_loop_1()}.

  @code{command_loop_2()} is invoked from three places: from
@code{initial_command_loop()} (called from @code{main()} at the end of
internal initialization), from the Lisp function @code{recursive-edit},
and from @code{call_command_loop()}.

  @code{call_command_loop()} is called when a macro is started and when
the minibuffer is entered; normal termination of the macro or minibuffer
causes a throw out of the recursive command loop. (To
@code{execute-kbd-macro} for macros and @code{exit} for minibuffers.
Note also that the low-level minibuffer-entering function,
@code{read-minibuffer-internal}, provides its own error handling and
does not need @code{command_loop_2()}'s error encapsulation; so it tells
@code{call_command_loop()} to invoke @code{command_loop_1()} directly.)

  Note that both read-minibuffer-internal and recursive-edit set up a
catch for @code{exit}; this is why @code{abort-recursive-edit}, which
throws to this catch, exits out of either one.

  @code{initial_command_loop()}, called from @code{main()}, sets up a
catch for @code{top-level} when invoking @code{command_loop_2()},
allowing functions to throw all the way to the top level if they really
need to.  Before invoking @code{command_loop_2()},
@code{initial_command_loop()} calls @code{top_level_1()}, which handles
all of the startup stuff (creating the initial frame, handling the
command-line options, loading the user's @file{.emacs} file, etc.).  The
function that actually does this is in Lisp and is pointed to by the
variable @code{top-level}; normally this function is
@code{normal-top-level}.  @code{top_level_1()} is just an error-handling
wrapper similar to @code{command_loop_2()}.  Note also that
@code{initial_command_loop()} sets up a catch for @code{top-level} when
invoking @code{top_level_1()}, just like when it invokes
@code{command_loop_2()}.

@node Specifics of the Event Gathering Mechanism, Specifics About the Emacs Event, Main Loop, Events and the Event Loop
@section Specifics of the Event Gathering Mechanism
@cindex event gathering mechanism, specifics of the

  Here is an approximate diagram of the collection processes
at work in XEmacs, under TTY's (TTY's are simpler than X
so we'll look at this first):

@noindent
@example
 asynch.      asynch.    asynch.   asynch.             [Collectors in
kbd events  kbd events   process   process                the OS]
      |         |         output    output
      |         |           |         |
      |         |           |         |      SIGINT,   [signal handlers
      |         |           |         |      SIGQUIT,     in XEmacs]
      V         V           V         V      SIGWINCH,
     file      file        file      file    SIGALRM
     desc.     desc.       desc.     desc.     |
     (TTY)     (TTY)       (pipe)    (pipe)    |
      |          |          |         |      fake    timeouts
      |          |          |         |      file        |
      |          |          |         |      desc.       |
      |          |          |         |      (pipe)      |
      |          |          |         |        |         |
      |          |          |         |        |         |
      |          |          |         |        |         |
      V          V          V         V        V         V
      ------>-----------<----------------<----------------
                  |
                  |
                  | [collected using @code{select()} in @code{emacs_tty_next_event()}
                  |  and converted to the appropriate Emacs event]
                  |
                  |
                  V          (above this line is TTY-specific)
                Emacs -----------------------------------------------
                event (below this line is the generic event mechanism)
                  |
                  |
was there     if not, call
a SIGINT?  @code{emacs_tty_next_event()}
    |             |
    |             |
    |             |
    V             V
    --->------<----
           |
           |     [collected in @code{event_stream_next_event()};
           |      SIGINT is converted using @code{maybe_read_quit_event()}]
           V
         Emacs
         event
           |
           \---->------>----- maybe_kbd_translate() ---->---\
                                                            |
                                                            |
                                                            |
     command event queue                                    |
                                               if not from command
  (contains events that were                   event queue, call
  read earlier but not processed,              @code{event_stream_next_event()}
  typically when waiting in a                               |
  sit-for, sleep-for, etc. for                              |
 a particular event to be received)                         |
               |                                            |
               |                                            |
               V                                            V
               ---->------------------------------------<----
                                               |
                                               | [collected in
                                               |  @code{next_event_internal()}]
                                               |
 unread-     unread-       event from          |
 command-    command-       keyboard       else, call
 events      event           macro      @code{next_event_internal()}
   |           |               |               |
   |           |               |               |
   |           |               |               |
   V           V               V               V
   --------->----------------------<------------
                     |
                     |      [collected in @code{next-event}, which may loop
                     |       more than once if the event it gets is on
                     |       a dead frame, device, etc.]
                     |
                     |
                     V
            feed into top-level event loop,
            which repeatedly calls @code{next-event}
            and then dispatches the event
            using @code{dispatch-event}
@end example

Notice the separation between TTY-specific and generic event mechanism.
When using the Xt-based event loop, the TTY-specific stuff is replaced
but the rest stays the same.

It's also important to realize that only one different kind of
system-specific event loop can be operating at a time, and must be able
to receive all kinds of events simultaneously.  For the two existing
event loops (implemented in @file{event-tty.c} and @file{event-Xt.c},
respectively), the TTY event loop @emph{only} handles TTY consoles,
while the Xt event loop handles @emph{both} TTY and X consoles.  This
situation is different from all of the output handlers, where you simply
have one per console type.

  Here's the Xt Event Loop Diagram (notice that below a certain point,
it's the same as the above diagram):

@example
asynch. asynch. asynch. asynch.                 [Collectors in
 kbd     kbd    process process                    the OS]
events  events  output  output
  |       |       |       |
  |       |       |       |     asynch. asynch. [Collectors in the
  |       |       |       |       X        X     OS and X Window System]
  |       |       |       |     events  events
  |       |       |       |       |        |
  |       |       |       |       |        |
  |       |       |       |       |        |    SIGINT, [signal handlers
  |       |       |       |       |        |    SIGQUIT,   in XEmacs]
  |       |       |       |       |        |    SIGWINCH,
  |       |       |       |       |        |    SIGALRM
  |       |       |       |       |        |       |
  |       |       |       |       |        |       |
  |       |       |       |       |        |       |      timeouts
  |       |       |       |       |        |       |          |
  |       |       |       |       |        |       |          |
  |       |       |       |       |        |       V          |
  V       V       V       V       V        V      fake        |
 file    file    file    file    file     file    file        |
 desc.   desc.   desc.   desc.   desc.    desc.   desc.       |
 (TTY)   (TTY)   (pipe)  (pipe) (socket) (socket) (pipe)      |
  |       |       |       |       |        |       |          |
  |       |       |       |       |        |       |          |
  |       |       |       |       |        |       |          |
  V       V       V       V       V        V       V          V
  --->----------------------------------------<---------<------
       |              |               |
       |              |               |[collected using @code{select()} in
       |              |               | @code{_XtWaitForSomething()}, called
       |              |               | from @code{XtAppProcessEvent()}, called
       |              |               | in @code{emacs_Xt_next_event()};
       |              |               | dispatched to various callbacks]
       |              |               |
       |              |               |
  emacs_Xt_        p_s_callback(),    | [popup_selection_callback]
  event_handler()  x_u_v_s_callback(),| [x_update_vertical_scrollbar_
       |           x_u_h_s_callback(),|  callback]
       |           search_callback()  | [x_update_horizontal_scrollbar_
       |              |               |  callback]
       |              |               |
       |              |               |
  enqueue_Xt_       signal_special_   |
  dispatch_event()  Xt_user_event()   |
  [maybe multiple     |               |
   times, maybe 0     |               |
   times]             |               |
       |            enqueue_Xt_       |
       |            dispatch_event()  |
       |              |               |
       |              |               |
       V              V               |
       -->----------<--               |
              |                       |
              |                       |
           dispatch             @code{Xt_what_callback()}
           event                  sets flags
           queue                      |
              |                       |
              |                       |
              |                       |
              |                       |
              ---->-----------<--------
                   |
                   |
                   |     [collected and converted as appropriate in
                   |            @code{emacs_Xt_next_event()}]
                   |
                   |
                   V          (above this line is Xt-specific)
                 Emacs ------------------------------------------------
                 event (below this line is the generic event mechanism)
                   |
                   |
was there      if not, call
a SIGINT?   @code{emacs_Xt_next_event()}
    |              |
    |              |
    |              |
    V              V
    --->-------<----
           |
           |        [collected in @code{event_stream_next_event()};
           |         SIGINT is converted using @code{maybe_read_quit_event()}]
           V
         Emacs
         event
           |
           \---->------>----- maybe_kbd_translate() -->-----\
                                                            |
                                                            |
                                                            |
     command event queue                                    |
                                              if not from command
  (contains events that were                  event queue, call
  read earlier but not processed,             @code{event_stream_next_event()}
  typically when waiting in a                               |
  sit-for, sleep-for, etc. for                              |
 a particular event to be received)                         |
               |                                            |
               |                                            |
               V                                            V
               ---->----------------------------------<------
                                               |
                                               | [collected in
                                               |  @code{next_event_internal()}]
                                               |
 unread-     unread-       event from          |
 command-    command-       keyboard       else, call
 events      event           macro      @code{next_event_internal()}
   |           |               |               |
   |           |               |               |
   |           |               |               |
   V           V               V               V
   --------->----------------------<------------
                     |
                     |      [collected in @code{next-event}, which may loop
                     |       more than once if the event it gets is on
                     |       a dead frame, device, etc.]
                     |
                     |
                     V
            feed into top-level event loop,
            which repeatedly calls @code{next-event}
            and then dispatches the event
            using @code{dispatch-event}
@end example

@node Specifics About the Emacs Event, Event Queues, Specifics of the Event Gathering Mechanism, Events and the Event Loop
@section Specifics About the Emacs Event
@cindex event, specifics about the Lisp object

@node Event Queues, Event Stream Callback Routines, Specifics About the Emacs Event, Events and the Event Loop
@section Event Queues
@cindex event queues
@cindex queues, event

There are two event queues here -- the command event queue (#### which
should be called "deferred event queue" and is in my glyph ws) and the
dispatch event queue. (MS Windows actually has an extra dispatch queue
for non-user events and uses the generic one only for user events.  This
is because user and non-user events in Windows come through the same
place -- the window procedure -- but under X, it's possible to
selectively process events such that we take all the user events before
the non-user ones. #### In fact, given the way we now drain the queue,
we might need two separate queues, like under Windows.  Need to think
carefully exactly how this works, and should certainly generalize the
two different queues.

The dispatch queue (which used to occur duplicated inside of each event
implementation) is used for events that have been read from the
window-system event queue(s) and not yet process by
@code{next_event_internal()}.  It exists for two reasons: (1) because in many
implementations, events often come from the window system by way of
callbacks, and need to push the event to be returned onto a queue; (2)
in order to handle QUIT in a guaranteed correct fashion without
resorting to weird implementation-specific hacks that may or may not
work well, we need to drain the window-system event queues and then look
through to see if there's an event matching quit-char (usually ^G).  the
drained events need to go onto a queue. (There are other, similar cases
where we need to drain the pending events so we can look ahead -- for
example, checking for pending expose events under X to avoid excessive
server activity.)

The command event queue is used @strong{AFTER} an event has been read from
@code{next_event_internal()}, when it needs to be pushed back.  This
includes, for example, @code{accept-process-output}, @code{sleep-for}
and @code{wait_delaying_user_input()}.  Eval events and the like,
generated by @code{enqueue-eval-event},
@code{enqueue_magic_eval_event()}, etc. are also pushed onto this queue.
Some events generated by callbacks are also pushed onto this queue, ####
although maybe shouldn't be.

The command queue takes precedence over the dispatch queue.

#### It is worth investigating to see whether both queues are really
needed, and how exactly they should be used.  @code{enqueue-eval-event},
for example, could certainly push onto the dispatch queue, and all
callbacks maybe should.  @code{wait_delaying_user_input()} seems to need
both queues, since it can take events from the dispatch queue and push
them onto the command queue; but it perhaps could be rewritten to avoid
this.  #### In general we need to review the handling of these two
queues, figure out exactly what ought to be happening, and document it.


@node Event Stream Callback Routines, Other Event Loop Functions, Event Queues, Events and the Event Loop
@section Event Stream Callback Routines
@cindex event stream callback routines
@cindex callback routines, event stream

There is one object called an event_stream.  This object contains
callback functions for doing the window-system-dependent operations
that XEmacs requires.

If XEmacs is compiled with support for X11 and the X Toolkit, then this
event_stream structure will contain functions that can cope with input
on XEmacs windows on multiple displays, as well as input from dumb tty
frames.

If it is desired to have XEmacs able to open frames on the displays of
multiple heterogeneous machines, X11 and SunView, or X11 and NeXT, for
example, then it will be necessary to construct an event_stream structure
that can cope with the given types.  Currently, the only implemented
event_streams are for dumb-ttys, and for X11 plus dumb-ttys,
and for mswindows.

To implement this for one window system is relatively simple.
To implement this for multiple window systems is trickier and may
not be possible in all situations, but it's been done for X and TTY.

Note that these callbacks are @strong{NOT} console methods; that's because
the routines are not specific to a particular console type but must
be able to simultaneously cope with all allowable console types.

The slots of the event_stream structure:

@table @code
@item next_event_cb
A function which fills in an XEmacs_event structure with the next event
available.  If there is no event available, then this should block.

IMPORTANT: timer events and especially process events *must not* be
returned if there are events of other types available; otherwise you can
end up with an infinite loop in @code{Fdiscard_input()}.

@item event_pending_cb
A function which says whether there are events to be read.  If called
with an argument of 0, then this should say whether calling the
@code{next_event_cb} will block.  If called with a non-zero argument,
then this should say whether there are that many user-generated events
pending (that is, keypresses, mouse-clicks, dialog-box selection events,
etc.). (This is used for redisplay optimization, among other things.)
The difference is that the former includes process events and timer
events, but the latter doesn't.

If this function is not sure whether there are events to be read, it
@strong{must} return 0.  Otherwise various undesirable effects will
occur, such as redisplay not occurring until the next event occurs.

@item handle_magic_event_cb
XEmacs calls this with an event structure which contains window-system
dependent information that XEmacs doesn't need to know about, but which
must happen in order.  If the @code{next_event_cb} never returns an
event of type "magic", this will never be used.

@item format_magic_event_cb
Called with a magic event; print a representation of the innards of the
event to @var{PSTREAM}.

@item compare_magic_event_cb
Called with two magic events; return non-zero if the innards of the two
are equal, zero otherwise.

@item hash_magic_event_cb
Called with a magic event; return a hash of the innards of the event.

@item add_timeout_cb
Called with an @var{EMACS_TIME}, the absolute time at which a wakeup event
should be generated; and a void *, which is an arbitrary value that will
be returned in the timeout event.  The timeouts generated by this
function should be one-shots: they fire once and then disappear.  This
callback should return an int id-number which uniquely identifies this
wakeup.  If an implementation doesn't have microseconds or millisecond
granularity, it should round up to the closest value it can deal with.

@item remove_timeout_cb
Called with an int, the id number of a wakeup to discard.  This id
number must have been returned by the @code{add_timeout_cb}.  If the given
wakeup has already expired, this should do nothing.

@item select_process_cb
@item unselect_process_cb
These callbacks tell the underlying implementation to add or remove a
file descriptor from the list of fds which are polled for
inferior-process input.  When input becomes available on the given
process connection, an event of type "process" should be generated.

@item select_console_cb
@item unselect_console_cb
These callbacks tell the underlying implementation to add or remove a
console from the list of consoles which are polled for user-input.

@item select_device_cb
@item unselect_device_cb
These callbacks are used by Unixoid event loops (those that use @code{select()}
and file descriptors and have a separate input fd per device).

@item create_io_streams_cb
@item delete_io_streams_cb
These callbacks are called by process code to create the input and
output lstreams which are used for subprocess I/O.

@item quitp_cb
A handler function called from the @code{QUIT} macro which should check
whether the quit character has been typed.  On systems with SIGIO, this
will not be called unless the @code{sigio_happened} flag is true (it is set
from the SIGIO handler).
@end table

XEmacs has its own event structures, which are distinct from the event
structures used by X or any other window system.  It is the job of the
event_stream layer to translate to this format.

@node Other Event Loop Functions, Stream Pairs, Event Stream Callback Routines, Events and the Event Loop
@section Other Event Loop Functions
@cindex event loop functions, other

  @code{detect_input_pending()} and @code{input-pending-p} look for
input by calling @code{event_stream->event_pending_p} and looking in
@code{[V]unread-command-event} and the @code{command_event_queue} (they
do not check for an executing keyboard macro, though).

  @code{discard-input} cancels any command events pending (and any
keyboard macros currently executing), and puts the others onto the
@code{command_event_queue}.  There is a comment about a ``race
condition'', which is not a good sign.

  @code{next-command-event} and @code{read-char} are higher-level
interfaces to @code{next-event}.  @code{next-command-event} gets the
next @dfn{command} event (i.e.  keypress, mouse event, menu selection,
or scrollbar action), calling @code{dispatch-event} on any others.
@code{read-char} calls @code{next-command-event} and uses
@code{event_to_character()} to return the character equivalent.  With
the right kind of input method support, it is possible for (read-char)
to return a Kanji character.

@node Stream Pairs, Converting Events, Other Event Loop Functions, Events and the Event Loop
@section Stream Pairs
@cindex stream pairs
@cindex pairs, stream

Since there are many possible processes/event loop combinations, the
event code is responsible for creating an appropriate lstream type. The
process implementation does not care about that implementation.

The Create stream pair function is passed two void* values, which
identify process-dependent 'handles'. The process implementation uses
these handles to communicate with child processes. The function must be
prepared to receive handle types of any process implementation. Since
only one process implementation exists in a particular XEmacs
configuration, preprocessing is a means of compiling in the support for
the code which deals with particular handle types.

For example, a unixoid type loop, which relies on file descriptors, may be
asked to create a pair of streams by a unix-style process implementation.
In this case, the handles passed are unix file descriptors, and the code
may deal with these directly. Although, the same code may be used on Win32
system with X-Windows. In this case, Win32 process implementation passes
handles of type HANDLE, and the @code{create_io_streams} function must call
appropriate function to get file descriptors given HANDLEs, so that these
descriptors may be passed to @code{XtAddInput}.

The handle given may have special denying value, in which case the
corresponding lstream should not be created.

The return value of the function is a unique stream identifier. It is used
by processes implementation, in its  platform-independent part. There is
the get_process_from_usid function, which returns process object given its
USID. The event stream is responsible for converting its internal handle
type into USID.

Example is the TTY event stream. When a file descriptor signals input, the
event loop must determine process to which the input is destined. Thus,
the implementation uses process input stream file descriptor as USID, by
simply casting the fd value to USID type.

There are two special USID values. One, @code{USID_ERROR}, indicates
that the stream pair cannot be created. The second,
@code{USID_DONTHASH}, indicates that streams are created, but the event
stream does not wish to be able to find the process by its
USID. Specifically, if an event stream implementation never calls
@code{get_process_from_usid}, this value should always be returned, to
prevent accumulating useless information on USID to process
relationship.

@node Converting Events, Dispatching Events; The Command Builder, Stream Pairs, Events and the Event Loop
@section Converting Events
@cindex converting events
@cindex events, converting

  @code{character_to_event()}, @code{event_to_character()},
@code{event-to-character}, and @code{character-to-event} convert between
characters and keypress events corresponding to the characters.  If the
event was not a keypress, @code{event_to_character()} returns -1 and
@code{event-to-character} returns @code{nil}.  These functions convert
between character representation and the split-up event representation
(keysym plus mod keys).

@node Dispatching Events; The Command Builder, Focus Handling, Converting Events, Events and the Event Loop
@section Dispatching Events; The Command Builder
@cindex dispatching events; the command builder
@cindex events; the command builder, dispatching
@cindex command builder, dispatching events; the

Not yet documented.

@node Focus Handling, Editor-Level Control Flow Modules, Dispatching Events; The Command Builder, Events and the Event Loop
@section Focus Handling
@cindex focus handling

Ben's capsule lecture on focus:

In GNU Emacs @code{select-frame} never changes the window-manager frame
focus.  All it does is change the "selected frame".  This is similar to
what happens when we call @code{select-device} or @code{select-console}.
Whenever an event comes in (including a keyboard event), its frame is
selected; therefore, evaluating @code{select-frame} in @samp{*scratch*}
won't cause any effects because the next received event (in the same
frame) will cause a switch back to the frame displaying
@samp{*scratch*}.

Whenever a focus-change event is received from the window manager, it
generates a @code{switch-frame} event, which causes the Lisp function
@code{handle-switch-frame} to get run.  This basically just runs
@code{select-frame} (see below, however).

In GNU Emacs, if you want to have an operation run when a frame is
selected, you supply an event binding for @code{switch-frame} (and then
maybe call @code{handle-switch-frame}, or something ...).

In XEmacs, we @strong{do} change the window-manager frame focus as a
result of @code{select-frame}, but not until the next time an event is
received, so that a function that momentarily changes the selected frame
won't cause WM focus flashing. (#### There's something not quite right
here; this is causing the wrong-cursor-focus problems that you
occasionally see.  But the general idea is correct.) This approach is
winning for people who use the explicit-focus model, but is trickier to
implement.

We also don't make the @code{switch-frame} event visible but instead have
@code{select-frame-hook}, which is a better approach.

There is the problem of surrogate minibuffers, where when we enter the
minibuffer, you essentially want to temporarily switch the WM focus to
the frame with the minibuffer, and switch it back when you exit the
minibuffer.

GNU Emacs solves this with the crockish @code{redirect-frame-focus},
which says "for keyboard events received from FRAME, act like they're
coming from FOCUS-FRAME".  I think what this means is that, when a
keyboard event comes in and the event manager is about to select the
event's frame, if that frame has its focus redirected, the redirected-to
frame is selected instead.  That way, if you're in a minibufferless
frame and enter the minibuffer, then all Lisp functions that run see the
selected frame as the minibuffer's frame rather than the minibufferless
frame you came from, so that (e.g.) your typing actually appears in the
minibuffer's frame and things behave sanely.

There's also some weird logic that switches the redirected frame focus
from one frame to another if Lisp code explicitly calls
@code{select-frame} (but not if @code{handle-switch-frame} is called),
and saves and restores the frame focus in window configurations,
etc. etc.  All of this logic is heavily @code{#if 0}'d, with lots of
comments saying "No, this approach doesn't seem to work, so I'm trying
this ...  is it reasonable?  Well, I'm not sure ..." that are a red flag
indicating crockishness.

Because of our way of doing things, we can avoid all this crock.
Keyboard events never cause a select-frame (who cares what frame they're
associated with?  They come from a console, only).  We change the actual
WM focus to a surrogate minibuffer frame, so we don't have to do any
internal redirection.  In order to get the focus back, I took the
approach in @file{minibuf.el} of just checking to see if the frame we moved to
is still the selected frame, and move back to the old one if so.
Conceivably we might have to do the weird "tracking" that GNU Emacs does
when @code{select-frame} is called, but I don't think so.  If the
selected frame moved from the minibuffer frame, then we just leave it
there, figuring that someone knows what they're doing.  Because we don't
have any redirection recorded anywhere, it's safe to do this, and we
don't end up with unwanted redirection.

@node Editor-Level Control Flow Modules,  , Focus Handling, Events and the Event Loop
@section Editor-Level Control Flow Modules
@cindex control flow modules, editor-level
@cindex modules, editor-level control flow

@example
@file{event-Xt.c}
@file{event-msw.c}
@file{event-stream.c}
@file{event-tty.c}
@file{events-mod.h}
@file{gpmevent.c}
@file{gpmevent.h}
@file{events.c}
@file{events.h}
@end example

These implement the handling of events (user input and other system
notifications).

@file{events.c} and @file{events.h} define the @dfn{event} Lisp object
type and primitives for manipulating it.

@file{event-stream.c} implements the basic functions for working with
event queues, dispatching an event by looking it up in relevant keymaps
and such, and handling timeouts; this includes the primitives
@code{next-event} and @code{dispatch-event}, as well as related
primitives such as @code{sit-for}, @code{sleep-for}, and
@code{accept-process-output}. (@file{event-stream.c} is one of the
hairiest and trickiest modules in XEmacs.  Beware!  You can easily mess
things up here.)

@file{event-Xt.c} and @file{event-tty.c} implement the low-level
interfaces onto retrieving events from Xt (the X toolkit) and from TTY's
(using @code{read()} and @code{select()}), respectively.  The event
interface enforces a clean separation between the specific code for
interfacing with the operating system and the generic code for working
with events, by defining an API of basic, low-level event methods;
@file{event-Xt.c} and @file{event-tty.c} are two different
implementations of this API.  To add support for a new operating system
(e.g. NeXTstep), one merely needs to provide another implementation of
those API functions.

Note that the choice of whether to use @file{event-Xt.c} or
@file{event-tty.c} is made at compile time!  Or at the very latest, it
is made at startup time.  @file{event-Xt.c} handles events for
@emph{both} X and TTY frames; @file{event-tty.c} is only used when X
support is not compiled into XEmacs.  The reason for this is that there
is only one event loop in XEmacs: thus, it needs to be able to receive
events from all different kinds of frames.



@example
@file{keymap.c}
@file{keymap.h}
@end example

@file{keymap.c} and @file{keymap.h} define the @dfn{keymap} Lisp object
type and associated methods and primitives. (Remember that keymaps are
objects that associate event descriptions with functions to be called to
``execute'' those events; @code{dispatch-event} looks up events in the
relevant keymaps.)



@example
@file{cmdloop.c}
@end example

@file{cmdloop.c} contains functions that implement the actual editor
command loop---i.e. the event loop that cyclically retrieves and
dispatches events.  This code is also rather tricky, just like
@file{event-stream.c}.



@example
@file{macros.c}
@file{macros.h}
@end example

These two modules contain the basic code for defining keyboard macros.
These functions don't actually do much; most of the code that handles keyboard
macros is mixed in with the event-handling code in @file{event-stream.c}.



@example
@file{minibuf.c}
@end example

This contains some miscellaneous code related to the minibuffer (most of
the minibuffer code was moved into Lisp by Richard Mlynarik).  This
includes the primitives for completion (although filename completion is
in @file{dired.c}), the lowest-level interface to the minibuffer (if the
command loop were cleaned up, this too could be in Lisp), and code for
dealing with the echo area (this, too, was mostly moved into Lisp, and
the only code remaining is code to call out to Lisp or provide simple
bootstrapping implementations early in temacs, before the echo-area Lisp
code is loaded).


@node Asynchronous Events; Quit Checking, Lstreams, Events and the Event Loop, Top
@chapter Asynchronous Events; Quit Checking
@cindex asynchronous events; quit checking
@cindex asynchronous events

@menu
* Signal Handling::             
* Control-G (Quit) Checking::   
* Profiling::                   
* Asynchronous Timeouts::       
* Exiting::                     
@end menu

@node Signal Handling, Control-G (Quit) Checking, Asynchronous Events; Quit Checking, Asynchronous Events; Quit Checking
@section Signal Handling
@cindex signal handling

@node Control-G (Quit) Checking, Profiling, Signal Handling, Asynchronous Events; Quit Checking
@section Control-G (Quit) Checking
@cindex Control-g checking
@cindex C-g checking
@cindex quit checking
@cindex QUIT checking
@cindex critical quit

@emph{Note}: The code to handle QUIT is divided between @file{lisp.h}
and @file{signal.c}.  There is also some special-case code in the async
timer code in @file{event-stream.c} to notice when the poll-for-quit
(and poll-for-sigchld) timers have gone off.

Here's an overview of how this convoluted stuff works:

@enumerate
@item

Scattered throughout the XEmacs core code are calls to the macro QUIT;
This macro checks to see whether a @kbd{C-g} has recently been pressed
and not yet handled, and if so, it handles the @kbd{C-g} by calling
@code{signal_quit()}, which invokes the standard @code{Fsignal()} code,
with the error being @code{Qquit}.  Lisp code can establish handlers
for this (using @code{condition-case}), but normally there is no
handler, and so execution is thrown back to the innermost enclosing
event loop. (One of the things that happens when entering an event loop
is that a @code{condition-case} is established that catches @strong{all} calls
to @code{signal}, including this one.)

@item
How does the QUIT macro check to see whether @kbd{C-g} has been pressed;
obviously this needs to be extremely fast.  Now for some history.
In early Lemacs as inherited from the FSF going back 15 years or
more, there was a great fondness for using SIGIO (which is sent
whenever there is I/O available on a given socket, tty, etc.).
In fact, in GNU Emacs, perhaps even today, all reading of events
from the X server occurs inside the SIGIO handler!  This is crazy,
but not completely relevant.  What is relevant is that similar
stuff happened inside the SIGIO handler for @kbd{C-g}: it searched
through all the pending (i.e. not yet delivered to XEmacs yet)
X events for one that matched @kbd{C-g}.  When it saw a match, it set
Vquit_flag to Qt.  On TTY's, @kbd{C-g} is actually mapped to be the
interrupt character (i.e. it generates SIGINT), and XEmacs's
handler for this signal sets Vquit_flag to Qt.  Then, sometime
later after the signal handlers finished and a QUIT macro was
called, the macro noticed the setting of @code{Vquit_flag} and used
this as an indication to call @code{signal_quit()}.  What @code{signal_quit()}
actually does is set @code{Vquit_flag} to Qnil (so that we won't get
repeated interruptions from a single @kbd{C-g} press) and then calls
the equivalent of (signal 'quit nil).

@item
Another complication is introduced in that Vquit_flag is actually
exported to Lisp as @code{quit-flag}.  This allows users some level of
control over whether and when @kbd{C-g} is processed as quit, esp. in
combination with @code{inhibit-quit}.  This is another Lisp variable,
and if set to non-nil, it inhibits @code{signal_quit()} from getting
called, meaning that the @kbd{C-g} gets essentially ignored.  But not
completely: Because the resetting of @code{quit-flag} happens only
in @code{signal_quit()}, which isn't getting called, the @kbd{C-g} press is
still noticed, and as soon as @code{inhibit-quit} is set back to nil,
a quit will be signalled at the next QUIT macro.  Thus, what
@code{inhibit-quit} really does is defer quits until after the quit-
inhibitted period.

@item
Another consideration, introduced by XEmacs, is critical quitting.  If
you press @kbd{Control-Shift-G} instead of just @kbd{C-g},
@code{quit-flag} is set to @code{critical} instead of to t.  When QUIT
processes this value, it @strong{ignores} the value of
@code{inhibit-quit}.  This allows you to quit even out of a
quit-inhibitted section of code!  Furthermore, when @code{signal_quit()}
notices that it was invoked as a result of a critical quit, it
automatically invokes the debugger (which otherwise would only happen
when @code{debug-on-quit} is set to t).

@item
Well, I explained above about how @code{quit-flag} gets set correctly,
but I began with a disclaimer stating that this was the old way
of doing things.  What's done now?  Well, first of all, the SIGIO
handler (which formerly checked all pending events to see if there's
a @kbd{C-g}) now does nothing but set a flag -- or actually two flags,
something_happened and quit_check_signal_happened.  There are two
flags because the QUIT macro is now used for more than just handling
QUIT; it's also used for running asynchronous timeout handlers that
have recently expired, and perhaps other things.  The idea here is
that the QUIT macros occur extremely often in the code, but only occur
at places that are relatively safe -- in particular, if an error occurs,
nothing will get completely trashed.

@item
Now, let's look at QUIT again.  

@item 

UNFINISHED.  Note, however, that as of the point when this comment got
committed to CVS (mid-2001), the interaction between reading @kbd{C-g}
as an event and processing it as QUIT was overhauled to (for the first
time) be understandable and actually work correctly.  Now, the way
things work is that if @kbd{C-g} is pressed while XEmacs is blocking at
the top level, waiting for a user event, it will be read as an event;
otherwise, it will cause QUIT. (This includes times when XEmacs is
blocking, but not waiting for a user event,
e.g. @code{accept-process-output} and
@code{wait_delaying_user_events()}.)  Formerly, this was supposed to
happen, but didn't always due to a bizarre and broken scheme, documented
in @code{next_event_internal} like this:

@quotation
If we read a @kbd{C-g}, then set @code{quit-flag} but do not discard the
@kbd{C-g}.  The callers of @code{next_event_internal()} will do one of
two things:

@enumerate
@item
set @code{Vquit_flag} to Qnil. (@code{next-event} does this.) This will
cause the ^G to be treated as a normal keystroke.

@item
not change @code{Vquit_flag} but attempt to enqueue the ^G, at which
point it will be discarded.  The next time QUIT is called, it will
notice that @code{Vquit_flag} was set.
@end enumerate
@end quotation

This required weirdness in @code{enqueue_command_event_1} like this:

@quotation
put the event on the typeahead queue, unless the event is the quit char,
in which case the @code{QUIT} which will occur on the next trip through this
loop is all the processing we should do - leaving it on the queue would
cause the quit to be processed twice.
@end quotation

And further weirdness elsewhere, none of which made any sense, and
didn't work, because (e.g.) it required that QUIT never happen anywhere
inside @code{next_event_internal()} or any callers when @kbd{C-g} should
be read as a user event, which was impossible to implement in practice.

Now what we do is fairly simple.  Callers of
@code{next_event_internal()} that want @kbd{C-g} read as a user event
call @code{begin_dont_check_for_quit()}.  @code{next_event_internal()},
when it gets a @kbd{C-g}, simply sets @code{Vquit_flag} (just as when a
@kbd{C-g} is detected during the operation of @code{QUIT} or
@code{QUITP}), and then tries to @code{QUIT}.  This will fail if blocked
by the previous call, at which point @code{next_event_internal()} will
return the @kbd{C-g} as an event.  To unblock things, first set
@code{Vquit_flag} to nil (it was set to t when the @kbd{C-g} was read,
and if we don't reset it, the next call to @code{QUIT} will quit), and
then @code{unbind_to()} the depth returned by
@code{begin_dont_check_for_quit()}.  It makes no difference is
@code{QUIT} is called a zillion times in @code{next_event_internal()} or
anywhere else, because it's blocked and will never signal.
@end enumerate

@subsection Reentrancy Problems due to QUIT Checking

Checking for QUIT can do quite a long of things -- since it pumps the
event loop, this may cause arbitrary code to get executed, garbage collection
to happen. etc. (In fact, garbage collection cannot happen because it is inhibited.) This has led to crashes when functions get called reentrantly when not expecting it.  Example:

@subheading Crash -- reentrant @code{re_match_2()}

@example
  /* dont_check_for_quit is set in three circumstances:

     (1) when we are in the process of changing the window
     configuration.  The frame might be in an inconsistent state,
     which will cause assertion failures if we check for QUIT.

     (2) when we are reading events, and want to read the C-g
     as an event.  The normal check for quit will discard the C-g,
     which would be bad.

     (3) when we're going down with a fatal error.  we're most likely
     in an inconsistent state, and we definitely don't want to be
     interrupted. */

  /* We should *not* conditionalize on Vinhibit_quit, or
     critical-quit (Control-Shift-G) won't work right. */

  /* WARNING: Even calling check_quit(), without actually dispatching
     a quit signal, can result in arbitrary Lisp code getting executed
     -- at least under Windows. (Not to mention obvious Lisp
     invocations like asynchronous timer callbacks.) Here's a sample
     stack trace to demonstrate:

 NTDLL! DbgBreakPoint@@0 address 0x77f9eea9
assert_failed(const char * 0x012d036c, int 4596, const char * 0x012d0354) line 3478
re_match_2_internal(re_pattern_buffer * 0x012d6780, const unsigned char * 0x00000000, int 0, const unsigned char * 0x022f9328, int 34, int 0, re_registers * 0x012d53d0 search_regs, int 34) line 4596 + 41 bytes
re_search_2(re_pattern_buffer * 0x012d6780, const char * 0x00000000, int 0, const char * 0x022f9328, int 34, int 0, int 34, re_registers * 0x012d53d0 search_regs, int 34) line 4269 + 37 bytes
re_search(re_pattern_buffer * 0x012d6780, const char * 0x022f9328, int 34, int 0, int 34, re_registers * 0x012d53d0 search_regs) line 4031 + 37 bytes
string_match_1(long 31222628, long 30282164, long 28377092, buffer * 0x022fde00, int 0) line 413 + 69 bytes
Fstring_match(long 31222628, long 30282164, long 28377092, long 28377092) line 436 + 34 bytes
Ffuncall(int 3, long * 0x008297f8) line 3488 + 168 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x020ddc50, int 6, long * 0x020ddf50) line 744 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 34407748, int 1, long * 0x00829aec) line 516 + 53 bytes
Ffuncall(int 2, long * 0x00829ae8) line 3523 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x020ddc90, int 4, long * 0x020ddf90) line 744 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 34407720, int 1, long * 0x00829e28) line 516 + 53 bytes
Ffuncall(int 2, long * 0x00829e24) line 3523 + 17 bytes
mapcar1(long 15, long * 0x00829e48, long 34447820, long 34187868) line 2929 + 11 bytes
Fmapcar(long 34447820, long 34187868) line 3035 + 21 bytes
Ffuncall(int 3, long * 0x00829f20) line 3488 + 93 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x020c2b70, int 7, long * 0x020dd010) line 744 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 34407580, int 2, long * 0x0082a210) line 516 + 53 bytes
Ffuncall(int 3, long * 0x0082a20c) line 3523 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x020cf810, int 6, long * 0x020cfb10) line 744 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 34407524, int 0, long * 0x0082a580) line 516 + 53 bytes
Ffuncall(int 1, long * 0x0082a57c) line 3523 + 17 bytes
run_hook_with_args_in_buffer(buffer * 0x022fde00, int 1, long * 0x0082a57c, int 0) line 3980 + 13 bytes
run_hook_with_args(int 1, long * 0x0082a57c, int 0) line 3993 + 23 bytes
Frun_hooks(int 1, long * 0x0082a57c) line 3847 + 19 bytes
run_hook(long 34447484) line 4094 + 11 bytes
unsafe_handle_wm_initmenu_1(frame * 0x01dbb000) line 736 + 11 bytes
unsafe_handle_wm_initmenu(long 28377092) line 807 + 11 bytes
condition_case_1(long 28377116, long (long)* 0x0101c827 unsafe_handle_wm_initmenu(long), long 28377092, long (long, long)* 0x01005fa4 mswindows_modal_loop_error_handler(long, long), long 28377092) line 1692 + 7 bytes
mswindows_protect_modal_loop(long (long)* 0x0101c827 unsafe_handle_wm_initmenu(long), long 28377092) line 1194 + 32 bytes
mswindows_handle_wm_initmenu(HMENU__ * 0x00010199, frame * 0x01dbb000) line 826 + 17 bytes
mswindows_wnd_proc(HWND__ * 0x000501da, unsigned int 278, unsigned int 65945, long 0) line 3089 + 31 bytes
USER32! UserCallWinProc@@20 + 24 bytes
USER32! DispatchClientMessage@@20 + 47 bytes
USER32! __fnDWORD@@4 + 34 bytes
NTDLL! KiUserCallbackDispatcher@@12 + 19 bytes
USER32! DispatchClientMessage@@20 address 0x77e163cc
USER32! DefWindowProcW@@16 + 34 bytes
qxeDefWindowProc(HWND__ * 0x000501da, unsigned int 274, unsigned int 61696, long 98) line 1188 + 22 bytes
mswindows_wnd_proc(HWND__ * 0x000501da, unsigned int 274, unsigned int 61696, long 98) line 3362 + 21 bytes
USER32! UserCallWinProc@@20 + 24 bytes
USER32! DispatchClientMessage@@20 + 47 bytes
USER32! __fnDWORD@@4 + 34 bytes
NTDLL! KiUserCallbackDispatcher@@12 + 19 bytes
USER32! DispatchClientMessage@@20 address 0x77e163cc
USER32! DefWindowProcW@@16 + 34 bytes
qxeDefWindowProc(HWND__ * 0x000501da, unsigned int 262, unsigned int 98, long 540016641) line 1188 + 22 bytes
mswindows_wnd_proc(HWND__ * 0x000501da, unsigned int 262, unsigned int 98, long 540016641) line 3362 + 21 bytes
USER32! UserCallWinProc@@20 + 24 bytes
USER32! DispatchMessageWorker@@8 + 244 bytes
USER32! DispatchMessageW@@4 + 11 bytes
qxeDispatchMessage(const tagMSG * 0x0082c684 @{msg=0x00000106 wp=0x00000062 lp=0x20300001@}) line 989 + 10 bytes
mswindows_drain_windows_queue() line 1345 + 9 bytes
emacs_mswindows_quit_p() line 3947
event_stream_quit_p() line 666
check_quit() line 686
check_what_happened() line 437
re_match_2_internal(re_pattern_buffer * 0x012d5a18, const unsigned char * 0x00000000, int 0, const unsigned char * 0x02235000, int 23486, int 14645, re_registers * 0x012d53d0 search_regs, int 23486) line 4717 + 14 bytes
re_search_2(re_pattern_buffer * 0x012d5a18, const char * 0x02235000, int 23486, const char * 0x0223b38e, int 0, int 14645, int 8841, re_registers * 0x012d53d0 search_regs, int 23486) line 4269 + 37 bytes
search_buffer(buffer * 0x022fde00, long 29077572, long 13789, long 23487, long 1, int 1, long 28377092, long 28377092, int 0) line 1224 + 89 bytes
search_command(long 29077572, long 46975, long 28377116, long 28377092, long 28377092, int 1, int 1, int 0) line 1054 + 151 bytes
Fre_search_forward(long 29077572, long 46975, long 28377116, long 28377092, long 28377092) line 2147 + 31 bytes
Ffuncall(int 4, long * 0x0082ceb0) line 3488 + 216 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x02047810, int 13, long * 0x02080c10) line 744 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 34187208, int 3, long * 0x0082d1b8) line 516 + 53 bytes
Ffuncall(int 4, long * 0x0082d1b4) line 3523 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x01e96a10, int 6, long * 0x020ae510) line 744 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 34186676, int 3, long * 0x0082d4a0) line 516 + 53 bytes
Ffuncall(int 4, long * 0x0082d49c) line 3523 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x02156b50, int 4, long * 0x020c2db0) line 744 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 34186564, int 2, long * 0x0082d780) line 516 + 53 bytes
Ffuncall(int 3, long * 0x0082d77c) line 3523 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x0082d964, int 3, long * 0x020c2d70) line 744 + 16 bytes
Fbyte_code(long 29405156, long 34352480, long 7) line 2392 + 38 bytes
Feval(long 34354440) line 3290 + 187 bytes
condition_case_1(long 34354572, long (long)* 0x01087232 Feval(long), long 34354440, long (long, long)* 0x01084764 run_condition_case_handlers(long, long), long 28377092) line 1692 + 7 bytes
condition_case_3(long 34354440, long 28377092, long 34354572) line 1779 + 27 bytes
execute_rare_opcode(long * 0x0082dc7c, const unsigned char * 0x01b090af, int 143) line 1269 + 19 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x01b09090, int 6, long * 0x020ae590) line 654 + 17 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 34186620, int 0, long * 0x0082df68) line 516 + 53 bytes
Ffuncall(int 1, long * 0x0082df64) line 3523 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x02195470, int 1, long * 0x020c2df0) line 744 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 34186508, int 0, long * 0x0082e23c) line 516 + 53 bytes
Ffuncall(int 1, long * 0x0082e238) line 3523 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x01e5d410, int 6, long * 0x0207d410) line 744 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 34186312, int 1, long * 0x0082e524) line 516 + 53 bytes
Ffuncall(int 2, long * 0x0082e520) line 3523 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x02108fb0, int 2, long * 0x020c2e30) line 744 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 34186340, int 0, long * 0x0082e7fc) line 516 + 53 bytes
Ffuncall(int 1, long * 0x0082e7f8) line 3523 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x020fe150, int 2, long * 0x01e6f510) line 744 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 31008124, int 0, long * 0x0082ebd8) line 516 + 53 bytes
Ffuncall(int 1, long * 0x0082ebd4) line 3523 + 17 bytes
run_hook_with_args_in_buffer(buffer * 0x022fde00, int 1, long * 0x0082ebd4, int 0) line 3980 + 13 bytes
run_hook_with_args(int 1, long * 0x0082ebd4, int 0) line 3993 + 23 bytes
Frun_hooks(int 1, long * 0x0082ebd4) line 3847 + 19 bytes
Ffuncall(int 2, long * 0x0082ebd0) line 3509 + 14 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x01ef2210, int 5, long * 0x01da8e10) line 744 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 31020440, int 2, long * 0x0082eeb8) line 516 + 53 bytes
Ffuncall(int 3, long * 0x0082eeb4) line 3523 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x0082f09c, int 3, long * 0x01d89390) line 744 + 16 bytes
Fbyte_code(long 31102388, long 30970752, long 7) line 2392 + 38 bytes
Feval(long 31087568) line 3290 + 187 bytes
condition_case_1(long 30961240, long (long)* 0x01087232 Feval(long), long 31087568, long (long, long)* 0x01084764 run_condition_case_handlers(long, long), long 28510180) line 1692 + 7 bytes
condition_case_3(long 31087568, long 28510180, long 30961240) line 1779 + 27 bytes
execute_rare_opcode(long * 0x0082f450, const unsigned char * 0x01ef23ec, int 143) line 1269 + 19 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x01ef2310, int 6, long * 0x01da8f10) line 654 + 17 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 31020412, int 1, long * 0x0082f740) line 516 + 53 bytes
Ffuncall(int 2, long * 0x0082f73c) line 3523 + 17 bytes
execute_optimized_program(const unsigned char * 0x020fe650, int 3, long * 0x01d8c490) line 744 + 16 bytes
funcall_compiled_function(long 31020020, int 2, long * 0x0082fa14) line 516 + 53 bytes
Ffuncall(int 3, long * 0x0082fa10) line 3523 + 17 bytes
Fcall_interactively(long 29685180, long 28377092, long 28377092) line 1008 + 22 bytes
Fcommand_execute(long 29685180, long 28377092, long 28377092) line 2929 + 17 bytes
execute_command_event(command_builder * 0x01be1900, long 36626492) line 4048 + 25 bytes
Fdispatch_event(long 36626492) line 4341 + 70 bytes
Fcommand_loop_1() line 582 + 9 bytes
command_loop_1(long 28377092) line 495
condition_case_1(long 28377188, long (long)* 0x01064fb9 command_loop_1(long), long 28377092, long (long, long)* 0x010649d0 cmd_error(long, long), long 28377092) line 1692 + 7 bytes
command_loop_3() line 256 + 35 bytes
command_loop_2(long 28377092) line 269
internal_catch(long 28457612, long (long)* 0x01064b20 command_loop_2(long), long 28377092, int * volatile 0x00000000) line 1317 + 7 bytes
initial_command_loop(long 28377092) line 305 + 25 bytes
STACK_TRACE_EYE_CATCHER(int 1, char * * 0x01b63ff0, char * * 0x01ca5300, int 0) line 2501
main(int 1, char * * 0x01b63ff0, char * * 0x01ca5300) line 2938
XEMACS! mainCRTStartup + 180 bytes
_start() line 171
KERNEL32! BaseProcessStart@@4 + 115547 bytes
@end example

[explain dont_check_for_quit() et al]

@node Profiling, Asynchronous Timeouts, Control-G (Quit) Checking, Asynchronous Events; Quit Checking
@section Profiling
@cindex profiling
@cindex SIGPROF

We implement our own profiling scheme so that we can determine
things like which Lisp functions are occupying the most time.  Any
standard OS-provided profiling works on C functions, which is
not always that useful -- and inconvenient, since it requires compiling
with profile info and can't be retrieved dynamically, as XEmacs is
running.

The basic idea is simple.  We set a profiling timer using setitimer
(ITIMER_PROF), which generates a SIGPROF every so often.  (This runs not
in real time but rather when the process is executing or the system is
running on behalf of the process -- at least, that is the case under
Unix.  Under MS Windows and Cygwin, there is no @code{setitimer()}, so we
simulate it using multimedia timers, which run in real time.  To make
the results a bit more realistic, we ignore ticks that go off while
blocking on an event wait.  Note that Cygwin does provide a simulation
of @code{setitimer()}, but it's in real time anyway, since Windows doesn't
provide a way to have process-time timers, and furthermore, it's broken,
so we don't use it.) When the signal goes off, we see what we're in, and
add 1 to the count associated with that function.

It would be nice to use the Lisp allocation mechanism etc. to keep track
of the profiling information (i.e. to use Lisp hash tables), but we
can't because that's not safe -- updating the timing information happens
inside of a signal handler, so we can't rely on not being in the middle
of Lisp allocation, garbage collection, @code{malloc()}, etc.  Trying to make
it work would be much more work than it's worth.  Instead we use a basic
(non-Lisp) hash table, which will not conflict with garbage collection
or anything else as long as it doesn't try to resize itself.  Resizing
itself, however (which happens as a result of a @code{puthash()}), could be
deadly.  To avoid this, we make sure, at points where it's safe
(e.g. @code{profile_record_about_to_call()} -- recording the entry into a
function call), that the table always has some breathing room in it so
that no resizes will occur until at least that many items are added.
This is safe because any new item to be added in the sigprof would
likely have the @code{profile_record_about_to_call()} called just before it,
and the breathing room is checked.

In general: any entry that the sigprof handler puts into the table comes
from a backtrace frame (except "Processing Events at Top Level", and
there's only one of those).  Either that backtrace frame was added when
profiling was on (in which case @code{profile_record_about_to_call()} was
called and the breathing space updated), or when it was off -- and in
this case, no such frames can have been added since the last time
@code{start-profile} was called, so when @code{start-profile} is called we make
sure there is sufficient breathing room to account for all entries
currently on the stack.

Jan 1998: In addition to timing info, I have added code to remember call
counts of Lisp funcalls.  The @code{profile_increase_call_count()}
function is called from @code{Ffuncall()}, and serves to add data to
Vcall_count_profile_table.  This mechanism is much simpler and
independent of the SIGPROF-driven one.  It uses the Lisp allocation
mechanism normally, since it is not called from a handler.  It may
even be useful to provide a way to turn on only one profiling
mechanism, but I haven't done so yet.  --hniksic

Dec 2002: Total overhaul of the interface, making it sane and easier to
use. --ben

Feb 2003: Lots of rewriting of the internal code.  Add GC-consing-usage,
total GC usage, and total timing to the information tracked.  Track
profiling overhead and allow the ability to have internal sections
(e.g. internal-external conversion, byte-char conversion) that are
treated like Lisp functions for the purpose of profiling.  --ben

BEWARE: If you are modifying this file, be @strong{very} careful.  Correctly
implementing the "total" values is very tricky due to the possibility of
recursion and of functions already on the stack when starting to
profile/still on the stack when stopping.

@node Asynchronous Timeouts, Exiting, Profiling, Asynchronous Events; Quit Checking
@section Asynchronous Timeouts
@cindex asynchronous timeouts

@node Exiting,  , Asynchronous Timeouts, Asynchronous Events; Quit Checking
@section Exiting
@cindex exiting
@cindex crash
@cindex hang
@cindex core dump
@cindex Armageddon
@cindex exits, expected and unexpected
@cindex unexpected exits
@cindex expected exits

Ben's capsule summary about expected and unexpected exits from XEmacs.

Expected exits occur when the user directs XEmacs to exit, for example
by pressing the close button on the only frame in XEmacs, or by typing
@kbd{C-x C-c}.  This runs @code{save-buffers-kill-emacs}, which saves
any necessary buffers, and then exits using the primitive
@code{kill-emacs}.

However, unexpected exits occur in a few different ways:

@itemize @bullet
@item
A memory access violation or other hardware-generated exception occurs.
This is the worst possible problem to deal with, because the fault can
occur while XEmacs is in any state whatsoever, even quite unstable ones.
As a result, we need to be @strong{extremely} careful what we do.

@item
We are using one X display (or if we've used more, we've closed the
others already), and some hardware or other problem happens and
suddenly we've lost our connection to the display.  In this situation,
things are not so dire as in the last one; our code itself isn't
trashed, so we can continue execution as normal, after having set
things up so that we can exit at the appropriate time.  Our exit
still needs to be of the emergency nature; we have no displays, so
any attempts to use them will fail.  We simply want to auto-save
(the single most important thing to do during shut-down), do minimal
cleanup of stuff that has an independent existence outside of XEmacs,
and exit.
@end itemize

Currently, both unexpected exit scenarios described above set
@code{preparing_for_armageddon} to indicate that nonessential and possibly
dangerous things should not be done, specifically:

@itemize @minus
@item
no garbage collection.
@item
no hooks are run.
@item
no messages of any sort from autosaving.
@item
autosaving tries harder, ignoring certain failures.
@item
existing frames are not deleted.
@end itemize

(Also, all places that set @code{preparing_for_armageddon} also
set @code{dont_check_for_quit}.  This happens separately because it's
also necessary to set other variables to make absolutely sure
no quitting happens.)

In the first scenario above (the access violation), we also set
@code{fatal_error_in_progress}.  This causes more things to not happen:

@itemize @minus
@item
assertion failures do not abort.
@item
printing code does not do code conversion or gettext when
printing to stdout/stderr.
@end itemize

@node Lstreams, Subprocesses, Asynchronous Events; Quit Checking, Top
@chapter Lstreams
@cindex lstreams

  An @dfn{lstream} is an internal Lisp object that provides a generic
buffering stream implementation.  Conceptually, you send data to the
stream or read data from the stream, not caring what's on the other end
of the stream.  The other end could be another stream, a file
descriptor, a stdio stream, a fixed block of memory, a reallocating
block of memory, etc.  The main purpose of the stream is to provide a
standard interface and to do buffering.  Macros are defined to read or
write characters, so the calling functions do not have to worry about
blocking data together in order to achieve efficiency.

@menu
* Creating an Lstream::         Creating an lstream object.
* Lstream Types::               Different sorts of things that are streamed.
* Lstream Functions::           Functions for working with lstreams.
* Lstream Methods::             Creating new lstream types.
@end menu

@node Creating an Lstream, Lstream Types, Lstreams, Lstreams
@section Creating an Lstream
@cindex lstream, creating an

Lstreams come in different types, depending on what is being interfaced
to.  Although the primitive for creating new lstreams is
@code{Lstream_new()}, generally you do not call this directly.  Instead,
you call some type-specific creation function, which creates the lstream
and initializes it as appropriate for the particular type.

All lstream creation functions take a @var{mode} argument, specifying
what mode the lstream should be opened as.  This controls whether the
lstream is for input and output, and optionally whether data should be
blocked up in units of MULE characters.  Note that some types of
lstreams can only be opened for input; others only for output; and
others can be opened either way.  #### Richard Mlynarik thinks that
there should be a strict separation between input and output streams,
and he's probably right.

  @var{mode} is a string, one of

@table @code
@item "r"
  Open for reading.
@item "w"
  Open for writing.
@item "rc"
  Open for reading, but ``read'' never returns partial MULE characters.
@item "wc"
  Open for writing, but never writes partial MULE characters.
@end table

@node Lstream Types, Lstream Functions, Creating an Lstream, Lstreams
@section Lstream Types
@cindex lstream types
@cindex types, lstream

@table @asis
@item stdio

@item filedesc

@item lisp-string

@item fixed-buffer

@item resizing-buffer

@item dynarr

@item lisp-buffer

@item print

@item decoding

@item encoding
@end table

@node Lstream Functions, Lstream Methods, Lstream Types, Lstreams
@section Lstream Functions
@cindex lstream functions

@deftypefun {Lstream *} Lstream_new (Lstream_implementation *@var{imp}, const char *@var{mode})
Allocate and return a new Lstream.  This function is not really meant to
be called directly; rather, each stream type should provide its own
stream creation function, which creates the stream and does any other
necessary creation stuff (e.g. opening a file).
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun void Lstream_set_buffering (Lstream *@var{lstr}, Lstream_buffering @var{buffering}, int @var{buffering_size})
Change the buffering of a stream.  See @file{lstream.h}.  By default the
buffering is @code{STREAM_BLOCK_BUFFERED}.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int Lstream_flush (Lstream *@var{lstr})
Flush out any pending unwritten data in the stream.  Clear any buffered
input data.  Returns 0 on success, -1 on error.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefn Macro int Lstream_putc (Lstream *@var{stream}, int @var{c})
Write out one byte to the stream.  This is a macro and so it is very
efficient.  The @var{c} argument is only evaluated once but the @var{stream}
argument is evaluated more than once.  Returns 0 on success, -1 on
error.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro int Lstream_getc (Lstream *@var{stream})
Read one byte from the stream.  This is a macro and so it is very
efficient.  The @var{stream} argument is evaluated more than once.  Return
value is -1 for EOF or error.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn Macro void Lstream_ungetc (Lstream *@var{stream}, int @var{c})
Push one byte back onto the input queue.  This will be the next byte
read from the stream.  Any number of bytes can be pushed back and will
be read in the reverse order they were pushed back---most recent
first. (This is necessary for consistency---if there are a number of
bytes that have been unread and I read and unread a byte, it needs to be
the first to be read again.) This is a macro and so it is very
efficient.  The @var{c} argument is only evaluated once but the @var{stream}
argument is evaluated more than once.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefun int Lstream_fputc (Lstream *@var{stream}, int @var{c})
@deftypefunx int Lstream_fgetc (Lstream *@var{stream})
@deftypefunx void Lstream_fungetc (Lstream *@var{stream}, int @var{c})
Function equivalents of the above macros.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun Bytecount Lstream_read (Lstream *@var{stream}, void *@var{data}, Bytecount @var{size})
Read @var{size} bytes of @var{data} from the stream.  Return the number
of bytes read.  0 means EOF. -1 means an error occurred and no bytes
were read.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun Bytecount Lstream_write (Lstream *@var{stream}, void *@var{data}, Bytecount @var{size})
Write @var{size} bytes of @var{data} to the stream.  Return the number
of bytes written.  -1 means an error occurred and no bytes were written.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun void Lstream_unread (Lstream *@var{stream}, void *@var{data}, Bytecount @var{size})
Push back @var{size} bytes of @var{data} onto the input queue.  The next
call to @code{Lstream_read()} with the same size will read the same
bytes back.  Note that this will be the case even if there is other
pending unread data.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun int Lstream_close (Lstream *@var{stream})
Close the stream.  All data will be flushed out.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun void Lstream_reopen (Lstream *@var{stream})
Reopen a closed stream.  This enables I/O on it again.  This is not
meant to be called except from a wrapper routine that reinitializes
variables and such---the close routine may well have freed some
necessary storage structures, for example.
@end deftypefun

@deftypefun void Lstream_rewind (Lstream *@var{stream})
Rewind the stream to the beginning.
@end deftypefun

@node Lstream Methods,  , Lstream Functions, Lstreams
@section Lstream Methods
@cindex lstream methods

@deftypefn {Lstream Method} Bytecount reader (Lstream *@var{stream}, unsigned char *@var{data}, Bytecount @var{size})
Read some data from the stream's end and store it into @var{data}, which
can hold @var{size} bytes.  Return the number of bytes read.  A return
value of 0 means no bytes can be read at this time.  This may be because
of an EOF, or because there is a granularity greater than one byte that
the stream imposes on the returned data, and @var{size} is less than
this granularity. (This will happen frequently for streams that need to
return whole characters, because @code{Lstream_read()} calls the reader
function repeatedly until it has the number of bytes it wants or until 0
is returned.)  The lstream functions do not treat a 0 return as EOF or
do anything special; however, the calling function will interpret any 0
it gets back as EOF.  This will normally not happen unless the caller
calls @code{Lstream_read()} with a very small size.

This function can be @code{NULL} if the stream is output-only.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Lstream Method} Bytecount writer (Lstream *@var{stream}, const unsigned char *@var{data}, Bytecount @var{size})
Send some data to the stream's end.  Data to be sent is in @var{data}
and is @var{size} bytes.  Return the number of bytes sent.  This
function can send and return fewer bytes than is passed in; in that
case, the function will just be called again until there is no data left
or 0 is returned.  A return value of 0 means that no more data can be
currently stored, but there is no error; the data will be squirreled
away until the writer can accept data. (This is useful, e.g., if you're
dealing with a non-blocking file descriptor and are getting
@code{EWOULDBLOCK} errors.)  This function can be @code{NULL} if the
stream is input-only.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Lstream Method} int rewinder (Lstream *@var{stream})
Rewind the stream.  If this is @code{NULL}, the stream is not seekable.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Lstream Method} int seekable_p (Lstream *@var{stream})
Indicate whether this stream is seekable---i.e. it can be rewound.
This method is ignored if the stream does not have a rewind method.  If
this method is not present, the result is determined by whether a rewind
method is present.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Lstream Method} int flusher (Lstream *@var{stream})
Perform any additional operations necessary to flush the data in this
stream.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Lstream Method} int pseudo_closer (Lstream *@var{stream})
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Lstream Method} int closer (Lstream *@var{stream})
Perform any additional operations necessary to close this stream down.
May be @code{NULL}.  This function is called when @code{Lstream_close()}
is called or when the stream is garbage-collected.  When this function
is called, all pending data in the stream will already have been written
out.
@end deftypefn

@deftypefn {Lstream Method} Lisp_Object marker (Lisp_Object @var{lstream}, void (*@var{markfun}) (Lisp_Object))
Mark this object for garbage collection.  Same semantics as a standard
@code{Lisp_Object} marker.  This function can be @code{NULL}.
@end deftypefn

@node Subprocesses, Interface to MS Windows, Lstreams, Top
@chapter Subprocesses
@cindex subprocesses

  The fields of a process are:

@table @code
@item name
A string, the name of the process.

@item command
A list containing the command arguments that were used to start this
process.

@item filter
A function used to accept output from the process instead of a buffer,
or @code{nil}.

@item sentinel
A function called whenever the process receives a signal, or @code{nil}.

@item buffer
The associated buffer of the process.

@item pid
An integer, the Unix process @sc{id}.

@item childp
A flag, non-@code{nil} if this is really a child process.
It is @code{nil} for a network connection.

@item mark
A marker indicating the position of the end of the last output from this
process inserted into the buffer.  This is often but not always the end
of the buffer.

@item kill_without_query
If this is non-@code{nil}, killing XEmacs while this process is still
running does not ask for confirmation about killing the process.

@item raw_status_low
@itemx raw_status_high
These two fields record 16 bits each of the process status returned by
the @code{wait} system call.

@item status
The process status, as @code{process-status} should return it.

@item tick
@itemx update_tick
If these two fields are not equal, a change in the status of the process
needs to be reported, either by running the sentinel or by inserting a
message in the process buffer.

@item pty_flag
Non-@code{nil} if communication with the subprocess uses a @sc{pty};
@code{nil} if it uses a pipe.

@item infd
The file descriptor for input from the process.

@item outfd
The file descriptor for output to the process.

@item subtty
The file descriptor for the terminal that the subprocess is using.  (On
some systems, there is no need to record this, so the value is
@code{-1}.)

@item tty_name
The name of the terminal that the subprocess is using,
or @code{nil} if it is using pipes.
@end table

@node Interface to MS Windows, Interface to the X Window System, Subprocesses, Top
@chapter Interface to MS Windows
@cindex MS Windows, interface to
@cindex Windows, interface to

@menu
* Different kinds of Windows environments::  
* Windows Build Flags::         
* Windows I18N Introduction::   
* Modules for Interfacing with MS Windows::  
@end menu

@node Different kinds of Windows environments, Windows Build Flags, Interface to MS Windows, Interface to MS Windows
@section Different kinds of Windows environments
@cindex different kinds of Windows environments
@cindex Windows environments, different kinds of
@cindex MS Windows environments, different kinds of

@subsubheading (a) operating system (OS) vs. window system vs. Win32 API vs. C runtime library (CRT) vs. and compiler

There are various Windows operating systems (Windows NT, 2000, XP, 95,
98, ME, etc.), which come in two basic classes: Windows NT (NT, 2000,
XP, and all future versions) and 9x (95, 98, ME).  9x-class operating
systems are a kind of hodgepodge of a 32-bit upper layer on top of a
16-bit MS-DOS-compatible lower layer.  NT-class operating systems are
written from the ground up as 32-bit (there are also 64-bit versions
available now), and provide many more features and much greater
stability, since there is full memory protection between all processes
and the between processes and the system.  NT-class operating systems
also provide emulation for DOS programs inside of a "sandbox" (i.e. a
walled-off environment in which one DOS program can screw up another
one, but there is theoretically no way for a DOS program to screw up the
OS itself).  From the perspective of XEmacs, the different between NT
and 9x is very important in Unicode support (not really provided under
9x -- see @file{intl-win32.c}) and subprocess creation, among other things.

The operating system provides the framework for accessing files and
devices and running programs.  From the perspective of a program, the
operating system provides a set of services.  At the lowest level, the
way to call these services is dependent on the processor the OS is
running on, but a portable interface is provided to C programs through
functions called "system calls".  Under Windows, this interface is called
the Win32 API, and includes file-manipulation calls such as @code{CreateFile()}
and @code{ReadFile()}, process-creation calls such as @code{CreateProcess()}, etc.

This concept of system calls goes back to Unix, where similar services
are available but through routines with different, simpler names, such
as @code{open()}, @code{read()}, @code{fork()}, @code{execve()}, etc.  In addition, Unix provides
a higher layer of routines, called the C Runtime Library (CRT), which
provide higher-level, more convenient versions of the same services (e.g.
"stream-oriented" file routines such as @code{fopen()} and @code{fread()}) as well
as various other utility functions, such as string-manipulation routines
(e.g. @code{strcpy()} and @code{strcmp()}).

For compatibility, a C Runtime Library (CRT) is also provided under
Windows, which provides a partial implementation of both the Unix CRT
and the Unix system-call API, implemented using the Win32 API.  The CRT
sources come with Visual C++ (VC++).  For example, under VC++ 6, look in
the CRT/SRC directory, e.g. for me (ben): /Program Files/Microsoft
Visual Studio/VC98/CRT/SRC. The CRT is provided using either MSVCRT
(dynamically linked) or @file{LIBC.LIB} (statically linked).

The window system provides the framework for creating overlapped windows
and unifying signals provided by various devices (input devices such as
the keyboard and mouse, timers, etc.) into a single event queue (or
"message queue", under Windows).  Like the operating system, the window
system can be viewed from the perspective of a program as a set of
services provided by an API of function calls.  Under Windows,
window-system services are also available through the Win32 API, while
under UNIX the window system is typically a separate component (e.g. the
X Windowing System, aka X Windows or X11).  The term "GUI" ("graphical
user interface") is often used to refer to the services provided by the
window system, or to a windowing interface provided by a program.

The Win32 API is implemented by various dynamic libraries, or DLL's.
The most important are KERNEL32, USER32, and GDI32.  KERNEL32 implements
the basic file-system and process services.  USER32 implements the
fundamental window-system services such as creating windows and handling
messages.  GDI32 implements higher-level drawing capabilities -- fonts,
colors, lines, etc.

C programs are compiled into executables using a compiler.  Under Unix,
a compiler usually comes as part of the operating system, but not under
Windows, where the compiler is a separate product.  Even under Unix,
people often install their own compilers, such as gcc.  Under Windows,
the Microsoft-standard compiler is Visual C++ (VC++).

It is possible to provide an emulation of any API using any other, as
long as the underlying API provides the suitable functionality.  This is
what Cygwin (www.cygwin.com) does.  It provides a fairly complete POSIX
emulation layer (POSIX is a government standard for Unix behavior) on
top of MS Windows -- in particular, providing the file-system, process,
tty, and signal semantics that are part of a modern, standard Unix
operating system.  Cygwin does this using its own DLL, @file{cygwin1.dll},
which makes calls to the Win32 API services in @file{kernel32.dll}.  Cygwin
also provides its own implementation of the C runtime library, called
@code{newlib} (@file{libcygwin.a}; @file{libc.a} and @file{libm.a} are symlinked to it), which is
implemented on top of the Unix system calls provided in @file{cygwin1.dll}.  In
addition, Cygwin provides static import libraries that give you direct
access to the Win32 API -- XEmacs uses this to provide GUI support under
Cygwin.  Cygwin provides a version of GCC (the GNU Project C compiler)
that is set up to automatically link with the appropriate Cygwin
libraries.  Cygwin also provides, as optional components, pre-compiled
binaries for a great number of open-source programs compiled under the
Cygwin environment.  This includes all of the standard Unix file-system,
text-manipulation, development, networking, database, etc. utilities, a
version of X Windows that uses the Win32 API underlyingly (see below),
and compilations of nearly all other common open-source packages
(Apache, TeX, [X]Emacs, Ghostscript, GTK, ImageMagick, etc.).

Similarly, you can emulate the functionality of X Windows using the
Win32 component of the Win32 API.  Cygwin provides a package to do this,
from the XFree86 project.  Other versions of X under Windows also exist,
such as the MicroImages MI/X server.  Each version potentially can come
comes with its own header and library files, allowing you to compile
X-Windows programs.

All of these different operating system and emulation layers can make
for a fair amount of confusion, so:

@subsubheading (b) CRT is not the same as VC++

Note that the CRT is @strong{NOT} (completely) part of VC++.  True, if you link
statically, the CRT (in the form of @file{LIBC.LIB}, which comes with VC++)
will be inserted into the executable (.EXE), but otherwise the CRT will
be separate.  The dynamic version of the CRT is provided by @file{MSVCRT.DLL}
(or @file{MSVCRTD.DLL}, for debugging), which comes with Windows.  Hence, it's
possible to use a different compiler and still link with MSVCRT -- which
is exactly what MinGW does.

@subsubheading (c) CRT is not the same as the Win32 API

Note also that the CRT is totally separate from the Win32 API.  They
provide different functions and are implemented in different DLL's.
They are also different levels -- the CRT is implemented on top of
Win32.  Sometimes the CRT and Win32 both have their own versions of
similar concepts, such as locales.  These are typically maintained
separately, and can get out of sync.  Do not assume that changing a
setting in the CRT will have any effect on Win32 API routines using a
similar concept unless the CRT docs specifically say so.  Do not assume
that behavior described for CRT functions applies to Win32 API or
vice-versa.  Note also that the CRT knows about and is implemented on
top of the Win32 API, while the Win32 API knows nothing about the CRT.

@subsubheading (d) MinGW is not the same as Cygwin

As described in (b), Microsoft's version of the CRT (@file{MSVCRT.DLL}) is
provided as part of Windows, separate from VC++, which must be
purchased.  Hence, it is possible to write MSVCRT to provide CRT
services without using VC++.  This is what MinGW (www.mingw.org) does --
it is a port of GCC that will use MSVCRT.  The reason one might want to
do this is (a) it is free, and (b) it does not require a separately
installed DLL, as Cygwin does. (#### Maybe MinGW targets CRTDLL, not
MSVCRT?  If so, what is CRTDLL, and how does it differ from MSVCRT and
@file{LIBC.LIB}?) Primarily, what MinGW provides is patches to GCC (now
integrated into the standard distribution) and its own header files and
import libraries that are compatible with MSVCRT.  The best way to think
of MinGW is as simply another Windows compiler, like how there used to
be Microsoft and Borland compilers.  Because MinGW programs use all the
same libraries as VC++ programs, and hence the same services are
available, programs that compile under VC++ should compile under MinGW
with very little change, whereas programs that compile under Cygwin will
look quite different.

The confusion between MinGW and Cygwin is the confusion between the
environment that a compiler runs under and the target environment of a
program, i.e. the environment that a program is compiled to run under.
It's theoretically possible, for example, to compile a program under
Windows and generate a binary that can only be run under Linux, or
vice-versa -- or, for that matter, to use Windows, running on an Intel
machine to write and a compile a program that will run on the Mac OS,
running on a PowerPC machine.  This is called cross-compiling, and while
it may seem rather esoteric, it is quite normal when you want to
generate a program for a machine that you cannot develop on -- for
example, a program that will run on a Palm Pilot.  Originally, this is
how MinGW worked -- you needed to run GCC under a Cygwin environment and
give it appropriate flags, telling it to use the MinGW headers and
target @file{MSVCRT.DLL} rather than @file{CYGWIN1.DLL}. (In fact,
Cygwin standardly comes with MinGW's header files.) This was because GCC
was written with Unix in mind and relied on a large amount of
Unix-specific functionality.  To port GCC to Windows without using a
POSIX emulation layer would mean a lot of rewriting of GCC.  Eventually,
however, this was done, and it GCC was itself compiled using MinGW.  The
result is that currently you can develop MinGW applications either under
Cygwin or under native Windows.

@subsubheading (e) Operating system is not the same as window system

As per the above discussion, we can use either Native Windows (the OS
part of Win32 provided by @file{KERNEL32.DLL} and the Windows CRT as
provided by MSVCRT or CLL) or Cygwin to provide operating-system
functionality, and we can use either Native Windows (the windowing part
of Win32 as provided by @file{USER32.DLL} and @file{GDI32.DLL}) or X11
to provide window-system functionality.  This gives us four possible
build environments.  It's currently possible to build XEmacs with at
least three of these combinations -- as far as I know native + X11 is no
longer supported, although it used to be (support used to exist in
@file{xemacs.mak} for linking with some X11 libraries available from
somewhere, but it was bit-rotting and you could always use Cygwin; ####
what happens if we try to compile with MinGW, native OS + X11?).  This
may still seem confusing, so:

@table @asis
@item Native OS + native windowing
We call @code{CreateProcess()} to run subprocesses
(@file{process-nt.c}), and @code{CreateWindowEx()} to create a top-level
window (@file{frame-msw.c}).  We use @file{nt/xemacs.mak} to compile
with VC++, linking with the Windows CRT (@file{MSVCRT.DLL} or
@file{LIBC.LIB}) and with the various Win32 DLL's (@file{KERNEL32.DLL},
@file{USER32.DLL}, @file{GDI32.DLL}); or we use
@file{src/Makefile[.in.in]} to compile with GCC, telling it
(e.g. -mno-cygwin, see @file{s/mingw32.h}) to use MinGW (which will end
up linking with @file{MSVCRT.DLL}), and linking GCC with -lshell32
-lgdi32 -luser32 etc. (see @file{configure.in}).

@item Cygwin + native windowing 
We call @code{fork()}/@code{execve()} to run subprocesses
(@file{process-unix.c}), and @code{CreateWindowEx()} to create a
top-level window (@file{frame-msw.c}).  We use
@file{src/Makefile[in.in]} to compile with GCC (it will end up linking
with @file{CYGWIN1.DLL}) and link GCC with -lshell32 -lgdi32 -luser32
etc. (see @file{configure.in}).

@item Cygwin + X11
We call @code{fork()}/@code{execve()} to run subprocesses
(@file{process-unix.c}), and @code{XtCreatePopupShell()} to create a
top-level window (@file{frame-x.c}).  We use @file{src/Makefile[.in.in]}
to compile with GCC (it will end up linking with @file{CYGWIN1.DLL}) and
link GCC with -lXt, -lX11, etc. (see @file{configure.in}).

Finally, if native OS + X11 were possible, it might look something like

@item [Native OS + X11]
We call @code{CreateProcess()} to run subprocesses
(@file{process-nt.c}), and @code{XtCreatePopupShell()} to create a
top-level window (@file{frame-x.c}).  We use @file{nt/xemacs.mak} to
compile with VC++, linking with the Windows CRT (@file{MSVCRT.DLL} or
@file{LIBC.LIB}) and with the various X11 DLL's (@file{XT.DLL},
@file{XLIB.DLL}, etc.); or we use @file{src/Makefile[.in.in]} to compile with
GCC, telling it (e.g. -mno-cygwin, see @file{s/mingw32.h}) to use MinGW
(which will end up linking with @file{MSVCRT.DLL}), and linking GCC with
-lXt, -lX11, etc. (see @file{configure.in}).
@end table

One of the reasons that we maintain the ability to build under Cygwin
and X11 on Windows, when we have native support, is that it allows
Windows compilers to test under a Unix-like environment.

@node Windows Build Flags, Windows I18N Introduction, Different kinds of Windows environments, Interface to MS Windows
@section Windows Build Flags
@cindex Windows build flags
@cindex MS Windows build flags
@cindex build flags, Windows

@table @code
@item CYGWIN
for Cygwin-only stuff.
@item WIN32_NATIVE
Win32 native OS-level stuff (files, process, etc.).  Applies whenever
linking against the native C libraries -- i.e.  all compilations with
VC++ and with MINGW, but never Cygwin.
@item HAVE_X_WINDOWS
for X Windows (regardless of whether under MS Win)
@item HAVE_MS_WINDOWS
MS Windows native windowing system (anything related to the appearance
of the graphical screen).  May or may not apply to any of VC++, MINGW,
Cygwin.
@end table

Finally, there's also the MINGW build environment, which uses GCC
(similar to Cygwin), but native MS Windows libraries rather than a
POSIX emulation layer (the Cygwin approach).  This environment defines
WIN32_NATIVE, but also defines MINGW, which is used mostly because
uses its own include files (related to Cygwin), which have a few
things messed up.

Formerly, we had a whole host of flags.  Here's the conversion, for porting
code from GNU Emacs and such:

@c @multitable {Old Constant} {determine whether this code is really specific to MS-DOS (and not Windows -- e.g. DJGPP code}
@multitable @columnfractions .25 .75
@item Old Constant @tab New Constant
@item ---------------------------------------------------------------- @tab
@item @code{WINDOWSNT}
@tab @code{WIN32_NATIVE}
@item @code{WIN32}
@tab @code{WIN32_NATIVE}
@item @code{_WIN32}
@tab @code{WIN32_NATIVE}
@item @code{HAVE_WIN32}
@tab @code{WIN32_NATIVE}
@item @code{DOS_NT}
@tab @code{WIN32_NATIVE}
@item @code{HAVE_NTGUI}
@tab @code{WIN32_NATIVE}, unless it ends up already bracketed by this
@item @code{HAVE_FACES}
@tab always true
@item @code{MSDOS}
@tab determine whether this code is really specific to MS-DOS (and not
Windows -- e.g. DJGPP code); if so, delete the code; otherwise,
convert to @code{WIN32_NATIVE} (we do not support MS-DOS w/DOS Extender
under XEmacs)
@item @code{__CYGWIN__}
@tab @code{CYGWIN}
@item @code{__CYGWIN32__}
@tab @code{CYGWIN}
@item @code{__MINGW32__}
@tab @code{MINGW}
@end multitable

@node Windows I18N Introduction, Modules for Interfacing with MS Windows, Windows Build Flags, Interface to MS Windows
@section Windows I18N Introduction
@cindex Windows I18N
@cindex I18N, Windows
@cindex MS Windows I18N

@strong{Abstract:} This page provides an overview of the aspects of the
Win32 internationalization API that are relevant to XEmacs, including
the basic distinction between multibyte and Unicode encodings.  Also
included are pointers to how XEmacs should make use of this API.

The Win32 API is quite well-designed in its handling of strings encoded
for various character sets.  The API is geared around the idea that two
different methods of encoding strings should be supported.  These
methods are called multibyte and Unicode, respectively.  The multibyte
encoding is compatible with ASCII strings and is a more efficient
representation when dealing with strings containing primarily ASCII
characters, but it has a great number of serious deficiencies and
limitations, including that it is very difficult and error-prone to work
with strings in this encoding, and any particular string in a multibyte
encoding can only contain characters from a very limited number of
character sets.  The Unicode encoding rectifies all of these
deficiencies, but it is not compatible with ASCII strings (in other
words, an existing program will not be able to handle the encoded
strings unless it is explicitly modified to do so), and it takes up
twice as much memory space as multibyte encodings when encoding a purely
ASCII string.

Multibyte encodings use a variable number of bytes (either one or two)
to represent characters.  ASCII characters are also represented by a
single byte with its high bit not set, and non-ASCII characters are
represented by one or two bytes, the first of which always has its high
bit set.  (The second byte, when it exists, may or may not have its high
bit set.)  There is no single multibyte encoding.  Instead, there is
generally one encoding per non-ASCII character set.  Such an encoding is
capable of representing (besides ASCII characters, of course) only
characters from one (or possibly two) particular character sets.

Multibyte encoding makes processing of strings very difficult.  For
example, given a pointer to the beginning of a character within a
string, finding the pointer to the beginning of the previous character
may require backing up all the way to the beginning of the string, and
then moving forward.  Also, an operation such as separating out the
components of a path by searching for backslashes will fail if it's
implemented in the simplest (but not multibyte-aware) fashion, because
it may find what appears to be a backslash, but which is actually the
second byte of a two-byte character.  Also, the limited number of
character sets that any particular multibyte encoding can represent
means that loss of data is likely if a string is converted from the
XEmacs internal format into a multibyte format.

For these reasons, the C code in XEmacs should never do any sort of work
with multibyte encoded strings (or with strings in any external encoding
for that matter).  Strings should always be maintained in the internal
encoding, which is predictable, and converted to an external encoding
only at the point where the string moves from the XEmacs C code and
enters a system library function.  Similarly, when a string is returned
from a system library function, it should be immediately converted into
the internal coding before any operations are done on it.

Unicode, unlike multibyte encodings, is a fixed-width encoding where
every character is represented using 16 bits.  It is also capable of
encoding all the characters from all the character sets in common use in
the world.  The predictability and completeness of the Unicode encoding
makes it a very good encoding for strings that may contain characters
from many character sets mixed up with each other.  At the same time, of
course, it is incompatible with routines that expect ASCII characters
and also incompatible with general string manipulation routines, which
will encounter a great number of what would appear to be embedded nulls
in the string.  It also takes twice as much room to encode strings
containing primarily ASCII characters.  This is why XEmacs does not use
Unicode or similar encoding internally for buffers.

The Win32 API cleverly deals with the issue of 8 bit vs. 16 bit
characters by declaring a type called @code{@dfn{TCHAR}} which specifies
a generic character, either 8 bits or 16 bits.  Generally @code{TCHAR}
is defined to be the same as the simple C type @code{char}, unless the
preprocessor constant @code{UNICODE} is defined, in which case
@code{TCHAR} is defined to be @code{WCHAR}, which is a 16 bit type.
Nearly all functions in the Win32 API that take strings are defined to
take strings that are actually arrays of @code{TCHAR}s.  There is a type
@code{LPTSTR} which is defined to be a string of @code{TCHAR}s and
another type @code{LPCTSTR} which is a const string of @code{TCHAR}s.
The theory is that any program that uses @code{TCHAR}s exclusively to
represent characters and does not make assumptions about the size of a
@code{TCHAR} or the way that the characters are encoded should work
transparently regardless of whether the @code{UNICODE} preprocessor
constant is defined, which is to say, regardless of whether 8 bit
multibyte or 16 bit Unicode characters are being used.  The way that
this is actually implemented is that every Win32 API function that takes
a string as an argument actually maps to one of two functions which are
suffixed with an @code{A} (which stands for ANSI, and means multibyte
strings) or @code{W} (which stands for wide, and means Unicode strings).
The mapping is, of course, controlled by the same @code{UNICODE}
preprocessor constant.  Generally all structures containing strings in
them actually map to one of two different kinds of structures, with
either an @code{A} or a @code{W} suffix after the structure name.

Unfortunately, not all of the implementations of the Win32 API
implement all of the functionality described above.  In particular,
Windows 95 does not implement very much Unicode functionality.  It
does implement functions to convert multibyte-encoded strings to and
from Unicode strings, and provides Unicode versions of certain
low-level functions like @code{ExtTextOut()}.  In fact, all of
the rest of the Unicode versions of API functions are just stubs that
return an error.  Conversely, all versions of Windows NT completely
implement all the Unicode functionality, but some versions (especially
versions before Windows NT 4.0) don't implement much of the multibyte
functionality.  For this reason, as well as for general code
cleanliness, XEmacs needs to be written in such a way that it works
with or without the @code{UNICODE} preprocessor constant being
defined.

Getting XEmacs to run when all strings are Unicode primarily
involves removing any assumptions made about the size of characters.
Remember what I said earlier about how the point of conversion between
internally and externally encoded strings should occur at the point of
entry or exit into or out of a library function.  With this in mind,
an externally encoded string in XEmacs can be treated simply as an
arbitrary sequence of bytes of some length which has no particular
relationship to the length of the string in the internal encoding.

#### The rest of this is @strong{out-of-date} and needs to be written
to reference the actual coding systems or aliases that we currently use.

[[ To facilitate this, the enum @code{external_data_format}, which is
declared in @file{lisp.h}, is expanded to contain three new formats,
which are @code{FORMAT_LOCALE}, @code{FORMAT_UNICODE} and
@code{FORMAT_TSTR}.  @code{FORMAT_LOCALE} always causes encoding into a
multibyte string consistent with the encoding of the current locale.
The functions to handle locales are different under Unix and Windows and
locales are a process property under Unix and a thread property under
Windows, but the concepts are basically the same.  @code{FORMAT_UNICODE}
of course causes encoding into Unicode and @code{FORMAT_TSTR} logically
maps to either @code{FORMAT_LOCALE} or @code{FORMAT_UNICODE} depending
on the @code{UNICODE} preprocessor constant.

Under Unix the behavior of @code{FORMAT_TSTR} is undefined and this
particular format should not be used.  Under Windows however
@code{FORMAT_TSTR} should be used for pretty much all of the Win32 API
calls.  The other two formats should only be used in particular APIs
that specifically call for a multibyte or Unicode encoded string
regardless of the @code{UNICODE} preprocessor constant.  String
constants that are to be passed directly to Win32 API functions, such as
the names of window classes, need to be bracketed in their definition
with a call to the macro @code{TEXT}.  This awfully named macro, which
comes out of the Win32 API, appropriately makes a string of either
regular or wide chars, which is to say this string may be prepended with
an @code{L} (causing it to be a wide string) depending on the
@code{UNICODE} preprocessor constant.

By the way, if you're wondering what happened to @code{FORMAT_OS}, I
think that this format should go away entirely because it is too vague
and should be replaced by more specific formats as they are defined.
]]

Use Qnative for Unix conversion, Qmswindows_tstr for Windows ...

String constants that are to be passed directly to Win32 API functions,
such as the names of window classes, need to be bracketed in their
definition with a call to the macro XETEXT. This appropriately makes a
string of either regular or wide chars, which is to say this string may be
prepended with an L (causing it to be a wide string) depending on
XEUNICODE_P.

@node Modules for Interfacing with MS Windows,  , Windows I18N Introduction, Interface to MS Windows
@section Modules for Interfacing with MS Windows
@cindex modules for interfacing with MS Windows
@cindex interfacing with MS Windows, modules for
@cindex MS Windows, modules for interfacing with
@cindex Windows, modules for interfacing with

There are two different general Windows-related include files in src.

Uses are approximately:

@table @file
@item syswindows.h
Wrapper around @file{<windows.h>}, including missing defines as
necessary.  Includes stuff needed on both Cygwin and native Windows,
regardless of window system chosen.  Includes definitions needed for
Unicode conversion/encapsulation, and other Mule-related stuff, plus
various other prototypes and Windows-specific, but not GUI-specific,
stuff.

@item console-msw.h
Used on both Cygwin and native Windows, but only when native window
system (as opposed to X) chosen.  Includes @file{syswindows.h}.
@end table

Summary of files:

@table @file
@item console-msw.h
include file for native windowing (otherwise, @file{console-x.h}, etc.)
@item console-msw.c, frame-msw.c, etc.
native windowing, as above
@item process-nt.c
subprocess support for native OS (otherwise, @file{process-unix.c})
@item nt.c
support routines used under native OS
@item win32.c
support routines used under both OS environments
@item syswindows.h
support header for both environments
@item nt/xemacs.mak
Makefile for VC++ (otherwise, @file{src/Makefile.in.in})
@item s/windowsnt.h
s header for basic native-OS defines, VC++ compiler
@item s/mingw32.h
s header for basic native-OS defines, GCC/MinGW compiler
@item s/cygwin.h
s header for basic Cygwin defines
@item s/win32-native.h
s header for basic native-OS defines, all compilers
@item s/win32-common.h
s header for defines for both OS environments
@item intl-win32.c
internationalization functions for both OS environments
@item intl-encap-win32.c
Unicode encapsulation functions for both OS environments
@item intl-auto-encap-win32.c
Auto-generated Unicode encapsulation functions
@item intl-auto-encap-win32.h
Auto-generated Unicode encapsulation headers
@end table

@node Interface to the X Window System, Dumping, Interface to MS Windows, Top
@chapter Interface to the X Window System
@cindex X Window System, interface to the

Mostly undocumented.

@menu
* Lucid Widget Library::        An interface to various widget sets.
* Modules for Interfacing with X Windows::  
@end menu

@node Lucid Widget Library, Modules for Interfacing with X Windows, Interface to the X Window System, Interface to the X Window System
@section Lucid Widget Library
@cindex Lucid Widget Library
@cindex widget library, Lucid
@cindex library, Lucid Widget

Lwlib is extremely poorly documented and quite hairy.  The author(s)
blame that on X, Xt, and Motif, with some justice, but also sufficient
hypocrisy to avoid drawing the obvious conclusion about their own work.

The Lucid Widget Library is composed of two more or less independent
pieces.  The first, as the name suggests, is a set of widgets.  These
widgets are intended to resemble and improve on widgets provided in the
Motif toolkit but not in the Athena widgets, including menubars and
scrollbars.  Recent additions by Andy Piper integrate some ``modern''
widgets by Edward Falk, including checkboxes, radio buttons, progress
gauges, and index tab controls (aka notebooks).

The second piece of the Lucid widget library is a generic interface to
several toolkits for X (including Xt, the Athena widget set, and Motif,
as well as the Lucid widgets themselves) so that core XEmacs code need
not know which widget set has been used to build the graphical user
interface.

@menu
* Generic Widget Interface::    The lwlib generic widget interface.
* Scrollbars::                  
* Menubars::                    
* Checkboxes and Radio Buttons::  
* Progress Bars::               
* Tab Controls::                
@end menu

@node Generic Widget Interface, Scrollbars, Lucid Widget Library, Lucid Widget Library
@subsection Generic Widget Interface
@cindex widget interface, generic

In general in any toolkit a widget may be a composite object.  In Xt,
all widgets have an X window that they manage, but typically a complex
widget will have widget children, each of which manages a subwindow of
the parent widget's X window.  These children may themselves be
composite widgets.  Thus a widget is actually a tree or hierarchy of
widgets.

For each toolkit widget, lwlib maintains a tree of @code{widget_values}
which mirror the hierarchical state of Xt widgets (including Motif,
Athena, 3D Athena, and Falk's widget sets).  Each @code{widget_value}
has @code{contents} member, which points to the head of a linked list of
its children.  The linked list of siblings is chained through the
@code{next} member of @code{widget_value}.

@example
           +-----------+
           | composite |
           +-----------+
                 |
                 | contents
                 V
             +-------+ next +-------+ next +-------+
             | child |----->| child |----->| child |
             +-------+      +-------+      +-------+
                                |
                                | contents
                                V
                         +-------------+ next +-------------+
                         | grand child |----->| grand child |
                         +-------------+      +-------------+

The @code{widget_value} hierarchy of a composite widget with two simple
children and one composite child.
@end example

The @code{widget_instance} structure maintains the inverse view of the
tree.  As for the @code{widget_value}, siblings are chained through the
@code{next} member.  However, rather than naming children, the
@code{widget_instance} tree links to parents.

@example
           +-----------+
           | composite |
           +-----------+
                 A
                 | parent
                 |
             +-------+ next +-------+ next +-------+
             | child |----->| child |----->| child |
             +-------+      +-------+      +-------+
                                A
                                | parent
                                |
                         +-------------+ next +-------------+
                         | grand child |----->| grand child |
                         +-------------+      +-------------+

The @code{widget_value} hierarchy of a composite widget with two simple
children and one composite child.
@end example

This permits widgets derived from different toolkits to be updated and
manipulated generically by the lwlib library. For instance
@code{update_one_widget_instance} can cope with multiple types of widget
and multiple types of toolkit. Each element in the widget hierarchy is
updated from its corresponding @code{widget_value} by walking the
@code{widget_value} tree.  This has desirable properties.  For example,
@code{lw_modify_all_widgets} is called from @file{glyphs-x.c} and
updates all the properties of a widget without having to know what the
widget is or what toolkit it is from.  Unfortunately this also has its
hairy properties; the lwlib code quite complex. And of course lwlib has
to know at some level what the widget is and how to set its properties.

The @code{widget_instance} structure also contains a pointer to the root
of its tree.  Widget instances are further confi


@node Scrollbars, Menubars, Generic Widget Interface, Lucid Widget Library
@subsection Scrollbars
@cindex scrollbars

@node Menubars, Checkboxes and Radio Buttons, Scrollbars, Lucid Widget Library
@subsection Menubars
@cindex menubars

@node Checkboxes and Radio Buttons, Progress Bars, Menubars, Lucid Widget Library
@subsection Checkboxes and Radio Buttons
@cindex checkboxes and radio buttons
@cindex radio buttons, checkboxes and
@cindex buttons, checkboxes and radio

@node Progress Bars, Tab Controls, Checkboxes and Radio Buttons, Lucid Widget Library
@subsection Progress Bars
@cindex progress bars
@cindex bars, progress

@node Tab Controls,  , Progress Bars, Lucid Widget Library
@subsection Tab Controls
@cindex tab controls


@node Modules for Interfacing with X Windows,  , Lucid Widget Library, Interface to the X Window System
@section Modules for Interfacing with X Windows
@cindex modules for interfacing with X Windows
@cindex interfacing with X Windows, modules for
@cindex X Windows, modules for interfacing with

@example
Emacs.ad.h
@end example

A file generated from @file{Emacs.ad}, which contains XEmacs-supplied
fallback resources (so that XEmacs has pretty defaults).



@example
EmacsFrame.c
EmacsFrame.h
EmacsFrameP.h
@end example

These modules implement an Xt widget class that encapsulates a frame.
This is for ease in integrating with Xt.  The EmacsFrame widget covers
the entire X window except for the menubar; the scrollbars are
positioned on top of the EmacsFrame widget.

@strong{Warning:} Abandon hope, all ye who enter here.  This code took
an ungodly amount of time to get right, and is likely to fall apart
mercilessly at the slightest change.  Such is life under Xt.



@example
EmacsManager.c
EmacsManager.h
EmacsManagerP.h
@end example

These modules implement a simple Xt manager (i.e. composite) widget
class that simply lets its children set whatever geometry they want.
It's amazing that Xt doesn't provide this standardly, but on second
thought, it makes sense, considering how amazingly broken Xt is.


@example
EmacsShell-sub.c
EmacsShell.c
EmacsShell.h
EmacsShellP.h
@end example

These modules implement two Xt widget classes that are subclasses of
the TopLevelShell and TransientShell classes.  This is necessary to deal
with more brokenness that Xt has sadistically thrust onto the backs of
developers.



@example
xgccache.c
xgccache.h
@end example

These modules provide functions for maintenance and caching of GC's
(graphics contexts) under the X Window System.  This code is junky and
needs to be rewritten.



@example
select-msw.c
select-x.c
select.c
select.h
@end example

@cindex selections
  This module provides an interface to the X Window System's concept of
@dfn{selections}, the standard way for X applications to communicate
with each other.



@example
xintrinsic.h
xintrinsicp.h
xmmanagerp.h
xmprimitivep.h
@end example

These header files are similar in spirit to the @file{sys*.h} files and buffer
against different implementations of Xt and Motif.

@itemize @bullet
@item
@file{xintrinsic.h} should be included in place of @file{<Intrinsic.h>}.
@item
@file{xintrinsicp.h} should be included in place of @file{<IntrinsicP.h>}.
@item
@file{xmmanagerp.h} should be included in place of @file{<XmManagerP.h>}.
@item
@file{xmprimitivep.h} should be included in place of @file{<XmPrimitiveP.h>}.
@end itemize



@example
xmu.c
xmu.h
@end example

These files provide an emulation of the Xmu library for those systems
(i.e. HPUX) that don't provide it as a standard part of X.



@example
ExternalClient-Xlib.c
ExternalClient.c
ExternalClient.h
ExternalClientP.h
ExternalShell.c
ExternalShell.h
ExternalShellP.h
extw-Xlib.c
extw-Xlib.h
extw-Xt.c
extw-Xt.h
@end example

@cindex external widget
  These files provide the @dfn{external widget} interface, which allows an
XEmacs frame to appear as a widget in another application.  To do this,
you have to configure with @samp{--external-widget}.

@file{ExternalShell*} provides the server (XEmacs) side of the
connection.

@file{ExternalClient*} provides the client (other application) side of
the connection.  These files are not compiled into XEmacs but are
compiled into libraries that are then linked into your application.

@file{extw-*} is common code that is used for both the client and server.

Don't touch this code; something is liable to break if you do.


@node Dumping, Future Work, Interface to the X Window System, Top
@chapter Dumping
@cindex dumping

@menu
* Dumping Justification::       
* Overview::                    
* Data descriptions::           
* Dumping phase::               
* Reloading phase::             
* Remaining issues::            
@end menu

@node Dumping Justification, Overview, Dumping, Dumping
@section Dumping Justification
@cindex dumping, justification

The C code of XEmacs is just a Lisp engine with a lot of built-in
primitives useful for writing an editor.  The editor itself is written
mostly in Lisp, and represents around 100K lines of code.  Loading and
executing the initialization of all this code takes a bit a time (five
to ten times the usual startup time of current xemacs) and requires
having all the lisp source files around.  Having to reload them each
time the editor is started would not be acceptable.

The traditional solution to this problem is called dumping: the build
process first creates the lisp engine under the name @file{temacs}, then
runs it until it has finished loading and initializing all the lisp
code, and eventually creates a new executable called @file{xemacs}
including both the object code in @file{temacs} and all the contents of
the memory after the initialization.

This solution, while working, has a huge problem: the creation of the
new executable from the actual contents of memory is an extremely
system-specific process, quite error-prone, and which interferes with a
lot of system libraries (like malloc).  It is even getting worse
nowadays with libraries using constructors which are automatically
called when the program is started (even before @code{main()}) which tend to
crash when they are called multiple times, once before dumping and once
after (IRIX 6.x @file{libz.so} pulls in some C++ image libraries thru
dependencies which have this problem).  Writing the dumper is also one
of the most difficult parts of porting XEmacs to a new operating system.
Basically, `dumping' is an operation that is just not officially
supported on many operating systems.

The aim of the portable dumper is to solve the same problem as the
system-specific dumper, that is to be able to reload quickly, using only
a small number of files, the fully initialized lisp part of the editor,
without any system-specific hacks.

@node Overview, Data descriptions, Dumping Justification, Dumping
@section Overview
@cindex dumping overview

The portable dumping system has to:

@enumerate
@item
At dump time, write all initialized, non-quickly-rebuildable data to a
file [Note: currently named @file{xemacs.dmp}, but the name will
change], along with all information needed for the reloading.

@item
When starting xemacs, reload the dump file, relocate it to its new
starting address if needed, and reinitialize all pointers to this
data.  Also, rebuild all the quickly rebuildable data.
@end enumerate

Note: As of 21.5.18, the dump file has been moved inside of the
executable, although there are still problems with this on some systems.

@node Data descriptions, Dumping phase, Overview, Dumping
@section Data descriptions
@cindex dumping data descriptions

The more complex task of the dumper is to be able to write memory blocks
on the heap (lisp objects, i.e. lrecords, and C-allocated memory, such
as structs and arrays) to disk and reload them at a different address,
updating all the pointers they include in the process.  This is done by
using external data descriptions that give information about the layout
of the blocks in memory.

The specification of these descriptions is in lrecord.h.  A description
of an lrecord is an array of struct memory_description.  Each of these
structs include a type, an offset in the block and some optional
parameters depending on the type.  For instance, here is the string
description:

@example
static const struct memory_description string_description[] = @{
  @{ XD_BYTECOUNT,         offsetof (Lisp_String, size) @},
  @{ XD_OPAQUE_DATA_PTR,   offsetof (Lisp_String, data), XD_INDIRECT(0, 1) @},
  @{ XD_LISP_OBJECT,       offsetof (Lisp_String, plist) @},
  @{ XD_END @}
@};
@end example

The first line indicates a member of type Bytecount, which is used by
the next, indirect directive.  The second means "there is a pointer to
some opaque data in the field @code{data}".  The length of said data is
given by the expression @code{XD_INDIRECT(0, 1)}, which means "the value
in the 0th line of the description (welcome to C) plus one".  The third
line means "there is a Lisp_Object member @code{plist} in the Lisp_String
structure".  @code{XD_END} then ends the description.

This gives us all the information we need to move around what is pointed
to by a memory block (C or lrecord) and, by transitivity, everything
that it points to.  The only missing information for dumping is the size
of the block.  For lrecords, this is part of the
lrecord_implementation, so we don't need to duplicate it.  For C blocks
we use a struct sized_memory_description, which includes a size field
and a pointer to an associated array of memory_description.

@node Dumping phase, Reloading phase, Data descriptions, Dumping
@section Dumping phase
@cindex dumping phase

Dumping is done by calling the function @code{pdump()} (in @file{dumper.c}) which is
invoked from Fdump_emacs (in @file{emacs.c}).  This function performs a number
of tasks.

@menu
* Object inventory::            
* Address allocation::          
* The header::                  
* Data dumping::                
* Pointers dumping::            
@end menu

@node Object inventory, Address allocation, Dumping phase, Dumping phase
@subsection Object inventory
@cindex dumping object inventory
@cindex memory blocks

The first task is to build the list of the objects to dump.  This
includes:

@itemize @bullet
@item lisp objects
@item other memory blocks (C structures, arrays. etc)
@end itemize

We end up with one @code{pdump_block_list_elt} per object group (arrays
of C structs are kept together) which includes a pointer to the first
object of the group, the per-object size and the count of objects in the
group, along with some other information which is initialized later.

These entries are linked together in @code{pdump_block_list} structures
and can be enumerated thru either:

@enumerate
@item
the @code{pdump_object_table}, an array of @code{pdump_block_list}, one
per lrecord type, indexed by type number.

@item
the @code{pdump_opaque_data_list}, used for the opaque data which does
not include pointers, and hence does not need descriptions.

@item
the @code{pdump_desc_table}, which is a vector of
@code{memory_description}/@code{pdump_block_list} pairs, used for
non-opaque C memory blocks.
@end enumerate

This uses a marking strategy similar to the garbage collector.  Some
differences though:

@enumerate
@item
We do not use the mark bit (which does not exist for generic memory blocks
anyway); we use a big hash table instead.

@item
We do not use the mark function of lrecords but instead rely on the
external descriptions.  This happens essentially because we need to
follow pointers to generic memory blocks and opaque data in addition to
Lisp_Object members.
@end enumerate

This is done by @code{pdump_register_object()}, which handles
Lisp_Object variables, and @code{pdump_register_block()} which handles
generic memory blocks (C structures, arrays, etc.), which both delegate
the description management to @code{pdump_register_sub()}.

The hash table doubles as a map object to pdump_block_list_elmt (i.e.
allows us to look up a pdump_block_list_elmt with the object it points
to).  Entries are added with @code{pdump_add_block()} and looked up with
@code{pdump_get_block()}.  There is no need for entry removal.  The hash
value is computed quite simply from the object pointer by
@code{pdump_make_hash()}.

The roots for the marking are:

@enumerate
@item
the @code{staticpro}'ed variables (there is a special
@code{staticpro_nodump()} call for protected variables we do not want to
dump).

@item
the Lisp_Object variables registered via @code{dump_add_root_lisp_object}
(@code{staticpro()} is equivalent to @code{staticpro_nodump()} +
@code{dump_add_root_lisp_object()}).

@item
the data-segment memory blocks registered via @code{dump_add_root_block}
(for blocks with relocatable pointers), or @code{dump_add_opaque} (for
"opaque" blocks with no relocatable pointers; this is just a shortcut
for calling @code{dump_add_root_block} with a NULL description).

@item
the pointer variables registered via @code{dump_add_root_block_ptr},
each of which points to a block of heap memory (generally a C structure
or array).  Note that @code{dump_add_root_block_ptr} is not technically
necessary, as a pointer variable can be seen as a special case of a
data-segment memory block and registered using
@code{dump_add_root_block}.  Doing it this way, however, would require
another level of static structures declared.  Since pointer variables
are quite common, @code{dump_add_root_block_ptr} is provided for
convenience.  Note also that internally we have to treat it separately
from @code{dump_add_root_block} rather than writing the former as a call
to the latter, since we don't have support for creating and using memory
descriptions on the fly -- they must all be statically declared in the
data-segment.
@end enumerate

This does not include the GCPRO'ed variables, the specbinds, the
catchtags, the backlist, the redisplay or the profiling info, since we
do not want to rebuild the actual chain of lisp calls which end up to
the dump-emacs call, only the global variables.

Weak lists and weak hash tables are dumped as if they were their
non-weak equivalent (without changing their type, of course).  This has
not yet been a problem.

@node Address allocation, The header, Object inventory, Dumping phase
@subsection Address allocation
@cindex dumping address allocation


The next step is to allocate the offsets of each of the objects in the
final dump file.  This is done by @code{pdump_allocate_offset()} which
is called indirectly by @code{pdump_scan_by_alignment()}.

The strategy to deal with alignment problems uses these facts:

@enumerate
@item
real world alignment requirements are powers of two.

@item
the C compiler is required to adjust the size of a struct so that you
can have an array of them next to each other.  This means you can have an
upper bound of the alignment requirements of a given structure by
looking at which power of two its size is a multiple.

@item
the non-variant part of variable size lrecords has an alignment
requirement of 4.
@end enumerate

Hence, for each lrecord type, C struct type or opaque data block the
alignment requirement is computed as a power of two, with a minimum of
2^2 for lrecords.  @code{pdump_scan_by_alignment()} then scans all the
@code{pdump_block_list_elmt}'s, the ones with the highest requirements
first.  This ensures the best packing.

The maximum alignment requirement we take into account is 2^8.

@code{pdump_allocate_offset()} only has to do a linear allocation,
starting at offset 256 (this leaves room for the header and keeps the
alignments happy).

@node The header, Data dumping, Address allocation, Dumping phase
@subsection The header
@cindex dumping, the header

The next step creates the file and writes a header with a signature and
some random information in it.  The @code{reloc_address} field, which
indicates at which address the file should be loaded if we want to avoid
post-reload relocation, is set to 0.  It then seeks to offset 256 (base
offset for the objects).

@node Data dumping, Pointers dumping, The header, Dumping phase
@subsection Data dumping
@cindex data dumping
@cindex dumping, data

The data is dumped in the same order as the addresses were allocated by
@code{pdump_dump_data()}, called from @code{pdump_scan_by_alignment()}.
This function copies the data to a temporary buffer, relocates all
pointers in the object to the addresses allocated in step Address
Allocation, and writes it to the file.  Using the same order means that,
if we are careful with lrecords whose size is not a multiple of 4, we
are ensured that the object is always written at the offset in the file
allocated in step Address Allocation.

@node Pointers dumping,  , Data dumping, Dumping phase
@subsection Pointers dumping
@cindex pointers dumping
@cindex dumping, pointers

A bunch of tables needed to reassign properly the global pointers are
then written.  They are:

@enumerate
@item
the pdump_root_block_ptrs dynarr
@item
the pdump_opaques dynarr
@item
a vector of all the offsets to the objects in the file that include a
description (for faster relocation at reload time)
@item
the pdump_root_objects and pdump_weak_object_chains dynarrs.
@end enumerate

For each of the dynarrs we write both the pointer to the variables and
the relocated offset of the object they point to.  Since these variables
are global, the pointers are still valid when restarting the program and
are used to regenerate the global pointers.

The @code{pdump_weak_object_chains} dynarr is a special case.  The
variables it points to are the head of weak linked lists of lisp objects
of the same type.  Not all objects of this list are dumped so the
relocated pointer we associate with them points to the first dumped
object of the list, or Qnil if none is available.  This is also the
reason why they are not used as roots for the purpose of object
enumeration.

Some very important information like the @code{staticpros} and
@code{lrecord_implementations_table} are handled indirectly using
@code{dump_add_opaque} or @code{dump_add_root_block_ptr}.

This is the end of the dumping part.

@node Reloading phase, Remaining issues, Dumping phase, Dumping
@section Reloading phase
@cindex reloading phase
@cindex dumping, reloading phase

@subsection File loading
@cindex dumping, file loading

The file is mmap'ed in memory (which ensures a PAGESIZE alignment, at
least 4096), or if mmap is unavailable or fails, a 256-bytes aligned
malloc is done and the file is loaded.

Some variables are reinitialized from the values found in the header.

The difference between the actual loading address and the reloc_address
is computed and will be used for all the relocations.


@subsection Putting back the pdump_opaques
@cindex dumping, putting back the pdump_opaques

The memory contents are restored in the obvious and trivial way.


@subsection Putting back the pdump_root_block_ptrs
@cindex dumping, putting back the pdump_root_block_ptrs

The variables pointed to by pdump_root_block_ptrs in the dump phase are
reset to the right relocated object addresses.


@subsection Object relocation
@cindex dumping, object relocation

All the objects are relocated using their description and their offset
by @code{pdump_reloc_one}.  This step is unnecessary if the
reloc_address is equal to the file loading address.


@subsection Putting back the pdump_root_objects and pdump_weak_object_chains
@cindex dumping, putting back the pdump_root_objects and pdump_weak_object_chains

Same as Putting back the pdump_root_block_ptrs.


@subsection Reorganize the hash tables
@cindex dumping, reorganize the hash tables

Since some of the hash values in the lisp hash tables are
address-dependent, their layout is now wrong.  So we go through each of
them and have them resorted by calling @code{pdump_reorganize_hash_table}.

@node Remaining issues,  , Reloading phase, Dumping
@section Remaining issues
@cindex dumping, remaining issues

The build process will have to start a post-dump xemacs, ask it the
loading address (which will, hopefully, be always the same between
different xemacs invocations) [[unfortunately, not true on Linux with
the ExecShield feature]] and relocate the file to the new address.
This way the object relocation phase will not have to be done, which
means no writes in the objects and that, because of the use of mmap, the
dumped data will be shared between all the xemacs running on the
computer.

Some executable signature will be necessary to ensure that a given dump
file is really associated with a given executable, or random crashes
will occur.  Maybe a random number set at compile or configure time thru
a define.  This will also allow for having differently-compiled xemacsen
on the same system (mule and no-mule comes to mind).

The DOC file contents should probably end up in the dump file.


@node Future Work, Future Work Discussion, Dumping, Top
@chapter Future Work
@cindex future work

@menu
* Future Work -- General Suggestions::  
* Future Work -- Elisp Compatibility Package::  
* Future Work -- Drag-n-Drop::  
* Future Work -- Standard Interface for Enabling Extensions::  
* Future Work -- Better Initialization File Scheme::  
* Future Work -- Keyword Parameters::  
* Future Work -- Property Interface Changes::  
* Future Work -- Toolbars::     
* Future Work -- Menu API Changes::  
* Future Work -- Removal of Misc-User Event Type::  
* Future Work -- Mouse Pointer::  
* Future Work -- Extents::      
* Future Work -- Version Number and Development Tree Organization::  
* Future Work -- Improvements to the @code{xemacs.org} Website::  
* Future Work -- Keybindings::  
* Future Work -- Byte Code Snippets::  
* Future Work -- Lisp Stream API::  
* Future Work -- Multiple Values::  
* Future Work -- Macros::       
* Future Work -- Specifiers::   
* Future Work -- Display Tables::  
* Future Work -- Making Elisp Function Calls Faster::  
* Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement::  
* Future Work -- Better Rendering Support::  
@end menu

@node Future Work -- General Suggestions, Future Work -- Elisp Compatibility Package, Future Work, Future Work
@section Future Work -- General Suggestions
@cindex future work, general suggestions
@cindex general suggestions, future work

@subheading Jamie Zawinski's XEmacs Wishlist

This document is based on Jamie Zawinski's 
@uref{http://www.jwz.org/doc/xemacs-wishlist.html,xemacs wishlist}. 
      Throughout this page, ``I'' refers to Jamie. 
      
The list has been substantially reformatted and edited to fit the needs 
      of this site. If you have any soul at all, you'll go check out the 
      original. OK? You should also check out some other 
@uref{http://www.xemacs.org/Releases/Public-21.2/execution.html#wishlists,wishlists}. 
      
      
@subsubheading About the List

I've ranked these (roughly) from easiest to hardest; though of all of 
them, I think the debugger improvements would be the most useful. I think 
the combination of emacs+gdb is the best Unix development environment 
currently available, but it's still lamentably primitive and extremely 
frustrating (much like Unix itself), especially if you know what kinds of 
features more modern integrated debuggers have. 

@subsubheading XEmacs Wishlist

@table @strong
@item Improve the keyboard macro system. 

Keyboard macros are one of the most useful concepts that emacs has to 
offer, but there's room for improvement. 

@table @strong
@item Make it possible to embed one macro inside of another. 

Often, I'll define a keyboard macro, and then realize that I've 
left something out, or that there's more that I need to do; for 
example, I may define a macro that does something to the current line, 
and then realize that I want to apply it to a lot of lines. So, I'd 
like this to work: 

@example
@kbd{C-x ( }
; start macro #1
@kbd{... }
; (do stuff)
@kbd{C-x ) }
; done with macro #1
@kbd{... }
; (do stuff)
@kbd{C-x ( }
; start macro #2
@kbd{C-x e }
; execute macro #1 (splice it into macro #2)
@kbd{C-s foo }
; move forward to the next spot
@kbd{C-x ) }
; done with macro #2
@kbd{C-u 1000 C-x e }
; apply the new macro
@end example

That is, simply, one should be able to wrap new text around an 
existing macro. I can't tell you how many times I've defined a complex 
macro but left out the ``@kbd{C-n C-a}'' at the end... 

Yes, you can accomplish this with M-x name-last-kbd-macro, but 
that's a pain. And it's also more permanent than I'd often like. 
@item Make it possible to correct errors when defining a macro. 

Right now, the act of defining a macro stops if you get an error 
while defining it, and all of the characters you've already typed into 
the macro are gone. It needn't be that way. I think that, when that 
first error occurs, the user should be given the option of taking the 
last command off of the macro and trying again. 

The macro-reader knows where the bounds of multi-character command 
sequences are, and it could even keep track of the corresponding undo 
records; rubbing out the previous entry on the macro could also undo 
any changes that command had made. (This should also work if the macro 
spans multiple buffers, and should restore window configurations as 
well.) 

You'd want multi-level undo for this as well, so maybe the way to 
go would be to add some new key sequence which was used only as the 
back-up-inside-a-keyboard-macro-definition command. 

I'm not totally sure that this would end up being very usable; 
maybe it would be too hard to deal with. Which brings us to: 
@item Make it possible to edit a keyboard macro after it has been defined. 

I only just discovered @code{edit-kbd-macro} (@kbd{C-x C-k}). 
It is very, very cool. 

The trick it does of showing the command which will be executed is 
somewhat error-prone, as it can only look up things in the current map 
or the global map; if the macro changed buffers, it wouldn't be 
displaying the right commands. (One of the things I often use macros 
for is operating on many files at once, by bringing up a dired buffer 
of those files, editing them, and then moving on to the next.) 

However, if the act of recording a macro also kept track of the 
actual commands that had gotten executed, it could make use of that 
info as well. 

Another way of editing a macro, other than as text in a buffer, 
would be to have a command which single-steps a macro: you would lean 
on the space bar to watch the macro execute one character (command?) 
at a time, and then when you reached the point you wanted to change, 
you could do some gesture to either: insert some keystrokes into the 
middle of the macro and then continue; or to replace the rest of the 
macro from here to the end; or something. 

Another similar hack might be to convert a macro to the equivalent 
lisp code, so that one could tweak it later in ways that would be too 
hard to do from the keyboard (wrapping parts of it in @code{while} loops or 
something.) (@kbd{M-x insert-kbd-macro} isn't really what I'm 
talking about here: I mean insert the list of commands, not the list 
of keystrokes.) 
@end table

@item Save my wrists! 

In the spirit of the `@code{teach-extended-commands-p}' variable, 
it would be interesting if emacs would keep track of what are the 
commands I use most often, perhaps grouped by proximity or mode -- it 
would then be more obvious which commands were most likely candidates 
for placement on a toolbar, or popup menu, or just a more convenient key 
binding. 

Bonus points if it figures out that I type ``@kbd{bt\n}'' and 
``@kbd{ret\ny\n}'' into my @samp{*gdb*} buffer about a hundred 
thousand times a day. 
@item XmCreateFileSelectionBox 

The thing that ``File/Open...'' pops up has excellent @emph{hack} 
value, but as a user interface, it's an abomination. Isn't it time 
someone added a real file selection dialog already? (For the 
Motifly-challenged, the Athena-based file selector that GhostView uses 
seems adequate.) 
@item Improve the toolbar system. 

It's great that XEmacs has a toolbar, but it's damn near impossible 
to customize it. 

@table @strong
@item Make it easy to define new toolbar buttons. 

Currently, to define a toolbar button that has a text equivalent, 
one must edit a pixmap, and put the text there! That's prohibitive. 
One should be able to add some kind of generic toolbar button, with a 
plain icon or none at all, but which has a text label, without having 
to use a paint program. 
@item Make it easy to have customized, mode-local toolbars. 

In my @code{c-mode-hook}, for example, I can add a couple of new 
keybindings, and delete a few others, and to do that, I don't have to 
duplicate the entire definition of the @code{c-mode-map}. Making 
mode-local additions and subtractions to the toolbars should be as 
easy. 
@item Make it easy to have customized, mode-local popup menus. 

The same situation holds for the right-mouse-button popup menu; one 
should be able to add new commands to those menus without difficulty. 
One problem is that each mode which does have a popup menu implements 
it in a different way... 
@end table

@item Make the External Widget work. 

About half of the work is done to make a replacement for the 
@code{XmText} widget which offloads editing responsibility to an 
external Emacs process. Someone should finish that. The benefit here 
would be that then, any Motif program could be linked such that all 
editing happened with a real Emacs behind it. (If you're Athena-minded, 
flavor with @code{Text} instead of @code{XmText} -- it's probably 
easy to make it work with both.) 

The part of this that is done already is the ability to run an Emacs 
screen on a Window object that has been created by another process (this 
is what the @file{ExternalClient.c} and @file{ExternalShell.c} stuff 
is.) What is left to be done is, adding the text-widget-editor aspects 
of this. 

First, the emacs screen being displayed on that window would have to 
be one without a modeline, and one which behaved sensibly in the context 
of ``I am a small multi-line text area embedded in a dialog box'' as 
opposed to ``I am a full-on text editor and lord of all that I survey.'' 

Second, the API that the (non-emacs-aware) user of the 
@code{XmText} widget expects would need to be implemented: give the 
caller the ability to pull the edited text string back out, and so on. 
The idea here being, hooking up emacs as the widget editor should be as 
transparent as possible. 
@item Bring the debugger interface into the eighties. 

Some of you may have seen my @file{gdb-highlight.el} 
package, that I posted to gnu.emacs.sources last month. I think 
it's really cool, but there should be a lot more work in that direction. 
For those of you who haven't seen it, what it does is watch text that 
gets inserted into the @samp{*gdb*} buffer and make very nearly 
everything be clickable and have a context-sensitive menu. Generally, 
the types that are noticed are: 

@itemize
@item function names; 
@item variable and parameter names; 
@item structure slots; 
@item source file names; 
@item type names; 
@item breakpoint numbers; 
@item stack frame numbers. 
@end itemize

Any time one of those objects is presented in the @samp{*gdb*} 
buffer, it is mousable. Clicking middle button on it takes some default 
action (edits the function, selects the stack frame, disables the 
breakpoint, ...) Clicking the right button pops up a menu of commands, 
including commands specific to the object under the mouse, and/or other 
objects on the same line. 

So that's all well and good, and I get far more joy out of what this 
code does for me than I expected, but there are still a bunch of 
limitations. The debugger interface needs to do much, much more. 

@table @strong
@item Make gdbsrc-mode not suck. 

The idea behind @code{gdbsrc-mode} is on the side of the angels: 
one should be able to focus on the source code and not on the debugger 
buffer, absolutely. But the implementation is just awful. 

First and foremost, it should not change ``modes'' (in the more 
general sense). Any commands that it defines should be on keys which 
are exclusively used for that purpose, not keys which are normally 
self-inserting. I can't be the only person who usually has occasion to 
actually @emph{edit} the sources which the debugger has chosen to 
display! Switching into and out of @code{gdbsrc-mode} is 
prohibitive. 

I want to be looking at my sources at all times, yet I don't want 
to have to give up my source-editing gestures. I think the right way 
to accomplish this is to put the gdbsrc commands on the toolbar and on 
popup menus; or to let the user define their own keys (I could see 
devoting my @key{kp_enter} key to ``step'', or something common 
like that.) 

Also it's extremely frustrating that one can't turn off gdbsrc mode 
once it has been loaded, without exiting and restarting emacs; that 
alone means that I'd probably never take the time to learn how to use 
it, without first having taken the time to repair it... 
@item Make it easier access to variable values. 

I want to be able to double-click on a variable name to highlight 
it, and then drag it to the debugger window to have its value printed. 

I want gestures that let me write as well as read: for example, to 
store value A into slot B. 
@item Make all breakpoints visible. 

Any time there is a running gdb which has breakpoints, the buffers 
holding the lines on which those breakpoints are set should have icons 
in them. These icons should be context-sensitive: I should be able to 
pop up a menu to enable or disable them, to delete them, to change 
their commands or conditions. 

I should also be able to @emph{move} them. It's 
annoying when you have a breakpoint with a complex condition or 
command on it, and then you realize that you really want it to be at a 
different location. I want to be able to drag-and-drop the icon to its 
new home. 
@item Make a debugger status display window. 

@itemize
@item             

I want a window off to the side that shows persistent information 
-- it should have a pane which is a drag-editable, drag-reorderable 
representation of the elements on gdb's ``display'' list; they 
should be displayed here instead of being just dumped in with the 
rest of the output in the @samp{*gdb*} buffer. 
@item             

I want a pane that displays the current call-stack and nothing 
else. I want a pane that displays the arguments and locals of the 
currently-selected frame and nothing else. I want these both to 
update as I move around on the stack. 
@item             

Since the unfortunate reality is that excavating this information 
from gdb can be slow, it would be a good idea for these panes to 
have a toggle button on them which meant ``stop updating'', so that 
when I want to move fast, I can, but I can easily get the display 
back when I need it again. 
@end itemize

The reason for all of this is that I spend entirely too much time 
scrolling around in the @samp{*gdb*} buffer; with gdb-highlight, I 
can just click on a line in the backtrace output to go to that frame, 
but I find that I spend a lot of time @emph{looking} for that 
backtrace: since it's mixed in with all the other random output, I 
waste time looking around for things (and usually just give up and 
type ``@kbd{bt}'' again, then thrash around as the buffer scrolls, 
and I try to find the lower frames that I'm interested in, as they 
have invariably scrolled off the window already... 
@item Save and restore breakpoints across emacs/debugger sessions. 

This would be especially handy given that gdb leaks like a sieve, 
and with a big program, I only get a few dozen relink-and-rerun 
attempts before gdb has blown my swap space. 
@item Keep breakpoints in sync with source lines. 

When a program is recompiled and then reloaded into gdb, the 
breakpoints often end up in less-than-useful places. For example, when 
I edit text which occurs in a file anywhere before a breakpoint, emacs 
is aware that the line of the bp hasn't changed, but just that it is 
in a different place relative to the top of the file. Gdb doesn't know 
this, so your breakpoints end up getting set in the wrong places 
(usually the maximally inconvenient places, like @emph{after} a loop 
instead of @emph{inside} it). But emacs knows, so emacs should 
inform the debugger, and move the breakpoints back to the places they 
were intended to be. 
@end table

(Possibly the OOBR stuff does some of this, but can't tell, because 
I've never been able to get it to do anything but beep at me and mumble 
about environments. I find it pretty funny that the manual keeps 
explaining to me how intuitive it is, without actually giving me a clue 
how to launch it...) 
@item Add better dialog box features. 

It'd be nice to be able to create more complex dialog boxes from 
emacs-lisp: ones with checkboxes, radio button groups, text fields, and 
popup menus. 
@item Add embeddable dialog boxes. 

One of the things that the now-defunct Energize code (the C side of 
it, that is) could do was embed a dialog box between the toolbar and the 
main text area -- buffers could have control panels associated with 
them, that had all kinds of complex behavior. 
@item Make the mark-stack be visible. 

You know, I've encountered people who have been using emacs for 
years, and never use the mark stack for navigation. I can't live without 
it; ``@kbd{C-u C-SPC}'' is among my most common gestures. 

@enumerate
@item           

It would be a lot easier to realize what's going to happen if the 
marks on the mark stack were visible. They could be displayed as small 
``caret'' glyphs, for example; something large enough to be visible, 
but not easily mistaken for a character or for the cursor. 
@item           

The marks and the selected region should be visible in the 
scrollbar as well -- I don't remember where I first saw this idea, but 
it's very cool: there's a second, less-strongly-rendered ``thumb'' in 
the scrollbar which indicates the position and size of the selection; 
and there are tiny tick-marks which indicate the positions of the 
saved points. 
@item           

Markers which are in registers (@code{point-to-register}, @kbd{C-x 
/}) should be displayed differently (more prominent.) 
@item           

It'd be cool if you could pick up markers and move them around, to 
adjust the points you'll be coming back to later. 
@end enumerate

@item Write a new garbage collector. 

The emacs GC is very primitive; it is also, fortunately, a 
rather well isolated module, and it would not be a very big task to swap 
it with a new one (once that new one was written, that is.) Someone 
should go bone up on modern GC techniques, and then just dive right 
in... 
@item Add support for lexical scope to the emacs-lisp runtime. 

Yadda yadda, this list goes to eleven. 
@end table

@*      
Subject: 
@strong{Re: XEmacs wishlist}
Date: Wed, 14 May 1997 16:18:23 -0700
From: Jamie Zawinski <jwz@@netscape.com>
Newsgroups: comp.emacs.xemacs, comp.emacs

Andreas Schwab wrote: 

@quotation
@emph{Use `C-u C-x (': }

@emph{start-kbd-macro:@*Non-nil arg (prefix arg) means append to last 
macro defined; This begins by re-executing that macro as if you typed it 
again. }
@end quotation

Cool, I didn't know it did that... 

But it only lets you append. I often want to prepend, or embed the 
macro multiple times (motion 1, C-x e, motion 2, C-x e, motion 3.)

@subheading 21.2 Showstoppers

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

DISTRIBUTION ISSUES

A. Unified Source Tarball.

Packages go under root/lib/xemacs/xemacs-packages and no one ever has
to mess with --package-path and the result can be moved from one
directory to another pre- or post-install.


Unified Binary Tarballs with Packages.

Same principles as above.

If people complain, we can also provide split binary tarballs
(architecture dependent and independent) and place these files in a
subdirectory so as not to confuse the majority just looking for one
tarball.

Under Windows, we need to provide a WISE-style GUI setup program. It's
already there but needs some work so you can select "all" packages
easily (should be the default).

Parallel Root and Package Trees.

If the user downloads separately, the main source and the packages, he
will naturally untar them into the same directory. This results in the
parallel root and package structure. We should support this as a "last
resort," i.e., if we find no packages anywhere and are about to resign
ourselves to not having packages, then look for a parallel package
tree. The user who sets things up like this should be able to either
run in place or "make install" and get a proper installed
XEmacs. Never should the user have to touch --package-path.

II. WINDOWS PRINTING

Looks like the internals are done but not the GUI. This must be
working in 21.2.

III. WINDOWS MULE

Basic support should be there. There's already a patch to get things
started and I'll be doing more work to make this real.

IV. GUTTER ETC.

This stuff needs to be "stable" and generally free from bugs. Any
APIs we create need to be well-reviewed or marked clearly as
experimental.

V. PORTABLE DUMPER

Last bits need to be cleaned up. This should be made the "default" for
a while to flush-out problems. Under Microsoft Windows, Portable
Dumper must be the default in 21.2 because of the problems with the
existing dump process.

COMMENT: I'd like to feature freeze this pretty soon and create a 21.3
tree where all of my major overhauls of Mule-related stuff will go
in. At the same time or around, we need to do the move-around in the
repository (or create a new one) and "upgrade" to the latest CVS
server.

@node Future Work -- Elisp Compatibility Package, Future Work -- Drag-n-Drop, Future Work -- General Suggestions, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Elisp Compatibility Package
@cindex future work, elisp compatibility package
@cindex elisp compatibility package, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

A while ago I created a package called Sysdep, which aimed to be a
forward compatibility package for Elisp.  The idea was that instead of
having to write your package using the oldest version of Emacs that you
wanted to support, you could use the newest XEmacs API, and then simply
load the Sysdep package, which would automatically define the new API in
terms of older APIs as necessary.  The idea of this package was good,
but its design wasn't perfect, and it wasn't widely adopted.  I propose
a new package called Compat that corrects the design flaws in Sysdep,
and hopefully will be adopted by most of the major packages.

In addition, this package will provide macros that can be used to
bracket code as necessary to disable byte compiler warnings generated as
a result of supporting the APIs of different versions of Emacs; or
rather the Compat package strives to provide useful constructs to make
doing this support easier, and these constructs have the side effect of
not causing spurious byte compiler warnings.  The idea here is that it
should be possible to create well-written, clean, and understandable
Elisp that supports both older and newer APIs, and has no byte compiler
warnings.  Currently many warnings are unavoidable, and as a result,
they are simply ignored, which also causes a lot of legitimate warnings
to be ignored.

The approach taken by the Sysdep package to make sure that the newest
API was always supported was fairly simple: when the Sysdep package was
loaded, it checked for the existence of new API functions, and if they
weren't defined, it defined them in terms of older API functions that
were defined.  This had the advantage that the checks for which API
functions were defined were done only once at load time rather than each
time the function was called.  However, the fact that the new APIs were
globally defined caused a lot of problems with unwanted interactions,
both with other versions of the Sysdep package provided as part of other
packages, and simply with compatibility code of other sorts in packages
that would determine whether an API existed by checking for the
existence of certain functions within that API.  In addition, the Sysdep
package did not scale well because it defined all of the functions that
it supported, regardless of whether or not they were used.

The Compat package remedies the first problem by ensuring that the new
APIs are defined only within the lexical scope of the packages that
actually make use of the Compat package.  It remedies the second problem
by ensuring that only definitions of functions that are actually used
are loaded.  This all works roughly according to the following scheme:

@enumerate
@item 

Part of the Compat package is a module called the Compat generator.
This module is actually run as an additional step during byte
compilation of a package that uses Compat.  This can happen either
through the makefile or through the use of an @code{eval-when-compile}
call within the package code itself.  What the generator does is scan
all of the Lisp code in the package, determine which function calls are
made that the Compat package knows about, and generates custom
@code{compat} code that conditionally defines just these functions when
the package is loaded.  The custom @code{compat} code can either be
written to a separate Lisp file (for use with multi-file packages), or
inserted into the beginning of the Lisp file of a single file package.
(In the latter case, the package indicates where this generated code
should go through the use of magic comments that mark the beginning and
end of the section.  Some will say that doing this trick is bad juju,
but I have done this sort of thing before, and it works very well in
practice).
@item 

The functions in the custom @code{compat} code have their names prefixed
with both the name of the package and the word @code{compat}, ensuring
that there will be no name space conflicts with other functions in the
same package, or with other packages that make use of the Compat
package.
@item 

The actual definitions of the functions in the custom @code{compat} code
are determined at run time.  When the equivalent API already exists, the
wrapper functions are simply defined directly in terms of the actual
functions, so that the only run time overhead from using the Compat
package is one additional function call.  (Alternatively, even this
small overhead could be avoided by retrieving the definitions of the
actual functions and supplying them as the definitions of the wrapper
functions.  However, this appears to me to not be completely safe.  For
example, it might have bad interactions with the advice package).
@item 

The code that wants to make use of the custom @code{compat} code is
bracketed by a call to the construct @code{compat-execute}.  What this
actually does is lexically bind all of the function names that are being
redefined with macro functions by using the Common Lisp macro macrolet.
(The definition of this macro is in the CL package, but in order for
things to work on all platforms, the definition of this macro will
presumably have to be copied and inserted into the custom @code{compat}
code).

@end enumerate

In addition, the Compat package should define the macro
@code{compat-if-fboundp}.  Similar macros such as
@code{compile-when-fboundp} and @code{compile-case-fboundp} could be
defined using similar principles).  The @code{compat-if-fboundp} macro
behaves just like an @code{(if (fboundp ...) ...)} clause when executed,
but in addition, when it's compiled, it ensures that the code inside the
@code{if-true} sub-block will not cause any byte compiler warnings about
the function in question being unbound.  I think that the way to
implement this would be to make @code{compat-if-fboundp} be a macro that
does what it's supposed to do, but which defines its own byte code
handler, which ensures that the particular warning in question will be
suppressed.  (Actually ensuring that just the warning in question is
suppressed, and not any others, might be rather tricky.  It certainly
requires further thought).

Note: An alternative way of avoiding both warnings about unbound
functions and warnings about obsolete functions is to just call the
function in question by using @code{funcall}, instead of calling the
function directly.  This seems rather inelegant to me, though, and
doesn't make it obvious why the function is being called in such a
roundabout manner.  Perhaps the Compat package should also provide a
macro @code{compat-funcall}, which works exactly like @code{funcall},
but which indicates to anyone reading the code why the code is expressed
in such a fashion.

If you're wondering how to implement the part of the Compat generator
where it scans Lisp code to find function calls for functions that it
wants to do something about, I think the best way is to simply process
the code using the Lisp function @code{read} and recursively descend any
lists looking for function names as the first element of any list
encountered.  This might extract out a few more functions than are
actually called, but it is almost certainly safer than doing anything
trickier like byte compiling the code, and attempting to look for
function calls in the result.  (It could also be argued that the names
of the functions should be extracted, not only from the first element of
lists, but anywhere @code{symbol} occurs.  For example, to catch places
where a function is called using @code{funcall} or @code{apply}.
However, such uses of functions would not be affected by the surrounding
macrolet call, and so there doesn't appear to be any point in extracting
them).

@node Future Work -- Drag-n-Drop, Future Work -- Standard Interface for Enabling Extensions, Future Work -- Elisp Compatibility Package, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Drag-n-Drop
@cindex future work, drag-n-drop
@cindex drag-n-drop, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@strong{Abstract:} I propose completely redoing the drag-n-drop
interface to make it powerful and extensible enough to support such
concepts as drag over and drag under visuals and context menus invoked
when a drag is done with the right mouse button, to allow drop handlers
to be defined for all sorts of graphical elements including buffers,
extents, mode lines, toolbar items, menubar items, glyphs, etc., and to
allow different packages to add and remove drop handlers for the same
drop sites without interfering with each other.  The changes are
extensive enough that I think they can only be implemented in version
22, and the drag-n-drop interface should remain experimental until then.

The new drag-n-drop interface centers around the twin concepts of
@dfn{drop site} and @dfn{drop handler}.  A @dfn{drop site} specifies a
particular graphical element where an object can be dropped onto, and a
@dfn{drop handler} encapsulates all of the behavior that happens when
such an object is dragged over and dropped onto a drop site.

Each drop site has an object associated with it which is passed to
functions that are part of the drop handlers associated with that site.
The type of this object depends on the graphical element that comprises
the drop site.  The drop site object can be a buffer, an extent, a
glyph, a menu path, a toolbar item path, etc.  (These last two object
types are defined in @uref{lisp-interface.html,Lisp Interface Changes}
in the sections on menu and toolbar API changes.  If we wanted to allow
drops onto other kinds of drop sites, for example mode lines, we would
have to create corresponding path objects).  Each such object type
should be able to be accessed using the generalized property interface
defined above, and should have a property called @code{drop-handlers}
associated with it that specifies all of the drop handlers associated
with the drop site.  Normally, this property is not accessed directly,
but instead by using the drop handler API defined below, and Lisp
packages should not make any assumptions about the format of the data
contained in the @code{drop-handlers} property.

Each drop handler has an object of type @code{drop-handler} associated
with it, whose primary purpose is to be a container for the various
properties associated with a particular drop handler.  These could
include, for example, a function invoked when the drop occurs, a context
menu invoked when a drop occurs as a result of a drag with the right
mouse button, functions invoked when a dragged object enters, leaves, or
moves within a drop site, the shape that the mouse pointer changes to
when an object is dragged over a drop site that allows this particular
object to be dropped onto it, the MIME types (actually a regular
expression matching the MIME types) of the allowable objects that can be
dropped onto the drop site, a @dfn{package tag} (a symbol specifying the
package that created the drop handler, used for identification
purposes), etc.  The drop handler object is passed to the functions that
are invoked as a result of a drag or a drop, most likely indirectly as
one of the properties of the drag or drop event passed to the function.
Properties of a drop handler object are accessed and modified in the
standard fashion using the generalized property interface.

A drop handler is added to a drop site using the @code{add-drop-handler}
function.  The drop handler itself can either be created separately
using the @code{make-drop-handler} function and then passed in as one of
the parameters to @code{add-drop-handler}, or it will be created
automatically by the @code{add-drop-handler} function, if the drop
handler argument is omitted, but keyword arguments corresponding to the
valid keyword properties for a drop handler are specified in the
@code{add-drop-handler} call.  Other functions, such as
@code{find-drop-handler}, @code{add-drop-handler} (when specifying a
drop handler before which the drop handler in question is to be added),
@code{remove-drop-handler} etc. should be defined with obvious
semantics.  All of these functions take or return a drop site object
which, as mentioned above, can be one of several object types
corresponding to graphical elements.  Defined drop handler functions
locate a particular drop handler using either the @code{MIME-type} or
@code{package-tag} property of the drop handler, as defined above.

Logically, the drop handlers associated with a particular drop site are
an ordered list.  The first drop handler whose specified MIME type
matches the MIME type of the object being dragged or dropped controls
what happens to this object.  This is important particularly because the
specified MIME type of the drop handler can be a regular expression
that, for example, matches all audio objects with any sub-type.

In the current drag-n-drop API, there is a distinction made between
objects with an associated MIME type and objects with an associated URL.
I think that this distinction is arbitrary, and should not exist.  All
objects should have a MIME type associated with them, and a new
XEmacs-specific MIME type should be defined for URLs, file names,
etc. as necessary.  I am not even sure that this is necessary, however,
as the MIME specification may specify a general concept of a pointer or
link to an object, which is exactly what we want.  Also in some cases
(for example, the name of a file that is locally available), the pointer
or link will have another MIME type associated with it, which is the
type of the object that is being pointed to.  I am not quite sure how we
should handle URL and file name objects being dragged, but I am positive
that it needs to be integrated with the mechanism used when an object
itself is being dragged or dropped.

As is described in @uref{misc-user-event.html,a separate page}, the
@code{misc-user-event} event type should be removed and split up into a
number of separate event types.  Two such event types would be
@code{drag-event} and @code{drop-event}.  A drop event is used when an
object is actually dropped, and a drag event is used if a function is
invoked as part of the dragging process.  (Such a function would
typically be used to control what are called @dfn{drag under visuals},
which are changes to the appearance of the drop site reflecting the fact
that a compatible object is being dragged over it).  The drag events and
drop events encapsulate all of the information that is pertinent to the
drag or drop action occurring, including such information as the actual
MIME type of the object in question, the drop handler that caused a
function to be invoked, the mouse event (or possibly even a keyboard
event) corresponding to the user's action that is causing the drag or
drop, etc.  This event is always passed to any function that is invoked
as a result of the drag or drop.  There should never be any need to
refer to the @code{current-mouse-event} variable, and in fact, this
variable should not be changed at all during a drag or a drop.

@node Future Work -- Standard Interface for Enabling Extensions, Future Work -- Better Initialization File Scheme, Future Work -- Drag-n-Drop, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Standard Interface for Enabling Extensions
@cindex future work, standard interface for enabling extensions
@cindex standard interface for enabling extensions, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@strong{Abstract:} Apparently, if you know the name of a package (for
example, @code{fusion}), you can load it using the @code{require}
function, but there's no standard way to turn it on or turn it off.  The
only way to figure out how to do that is to go read the source file,
where hopefully the comments at the start tell you the appropriate magic
incantations that you need to run in order to turn the extension on or
off.  There really needs to be standard functions, such as
@code{enable-extension} and @code{disable-extension}, to do this sort of
thing.  It seems like a glaring omission that this isn't currently
present, and it's really surprising to me that nobody has remarked on
this.

The easy part of this is defining the interface, and I think it should
be done as soon as possible.  When the package is loaded, it simply
calls some standard function in the package system, and passes it the
names of enable and disable functions, or perhaps just one function that
takes an argument specifying whether to enable or disable.  In any case,
this data is kept in a table which is used by the
@code{enable-extension} and @code{disable-extension} function.  There
should also be functions such as @code{extension-enabled-p} and
@code{enabled-extension-list}, and so on with obvious semantics.  The
hard part is actually getting packages to obey this standard interface,
but this is mitigated by the fact that the changes needed to support
this interface are so simple.

I have been conceiving of these enabling and disabling functions as
turning the feature on or off globally.  It's probably also useful to
have a standard interface returning a extension on or off in just the
particular buffer.  Perhaps then the appropriate interface would involve
registering a single function that takes an argument that specifies
various things, such as turn off globally, turn on globally, turn on or
off in the current buffer, etc.

Part of this interface should specify the correct way to define global
key bindings.  The correct rule for this, of course, is that the key
bindings should not happen when the package is loaded, which is often
how things are currently done, but only when the extension is actually
enabled.  The key bindings should go away when the extension is
disabled.  I think that in order to support this properly, we should
expand the keymap interface slightly, so that in addition to other
properties associated with each key binding is a list of shadow
bindings.  Then there should be a function called
@code{define-key-shadowing}, which is just like @code{define-key} but
which also remembers the previous key binding in a shadow list.  Then
there can be another function, something like @code{undefine-key}, which
restores the binding to the most recently added item on the shadow list.
There are already hash tables associated with each key binding, and it
should be easy to stuff additional values, such as a shadow list, into
the hash table.  Probably there should also be functions called
@code{global-set-key-shadowing} and @code{global-unset-key-shadowing}
with obvious semantics.

Once this interface is defined, it should be easy to expand the custom
package so it knows about this interface.  Then it will be possible to
put all sorts of extensions on the options menu so that they could be
turned off and turned on very easily, and then when you save the options
out to a file, the design settings for whether these extensions are
enabled or not are saved out with it.  A whole lot of custom junk that's
been added to a lot of different packages could be removed.  After doing
this, we might want to think of a way to classify extensions according
to how likely we think the user will want to use them.  This way we can
avoid the problem of having a list of 100 extensions and the user not
being able to figure out which ones might be useful.  Perhaps the most
useful extensions would appear immediately on the extensions menu, and
the less useful ones would appear in a submenu of that, and another
submenu might contain even less useful extensions.  Of course the
package authors might not be too happy with this, but the users probably
will be.  I think this at least deserves a thought, although it's
possible you might simply want to maintain a list on the web site of
extensions and a judgment on first of all, how commonly a user might
want this extension, and second of all, how well written and bug-free
the package is.  Both of these sorts of judgments could be obtained by
doing user surveys if need be.

@node Future Work -- Better Initialization File Scheme, Future Work -- Keyword Parameters, Future Work -- Standard Interface for Enabling Extensions, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Better Initialization File Scheme
@cindex future work, better initialization file scheme
@cindex better initialization file scheme, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@strong{Abstract:} A proposal is outlined for converting XEmacs to use
the @code{.xemacs} subdirectory for its initialization files instead of
putting them in the user's home directory.  In the process, a general
pre-initialization scheme is created whereby all of the initialization
parameters, such as the location of the initialization files, whether
these files are loaded or not, where the initial frame is created,
etc. that are currently specified by command line arguments, by
environment variables, and other means, can be specified in a uniform
way using Lisp code.  Reasonable default behavior for everything will
still be provided, and the older, simpler means can be used if desired.
Compatibility with the current location and name of the initialization
file, and the current ill-chosen use for the @code{.xemacs} directory is
maintained, and the problem of how to gracefully migrate a user from the
old scheme into the new scheme while still allowing the user to use GNU
Emacs or older versions of XEmacs is solved.  A proposal for changing
the way that the initial frame is mapped is also outlined; this would
allow the user's initialization file to control the way that the initial
frame appears without resorting to hacks, while still making echo area
messages visible as they appear, and allowing the user to debug errors
in the initialization file.

@subheading Principles in the new scheme

@enumerate
@item

XEmacs has a defined @dfn{pre-initialization process}.  This process,
whose purpose is to compute the values of the parameters that control
how the initializiaton process proceeds, occurs as early as possible
after the Lisp engine has been initialized, and in particular, it occurs
before any devices have been opened, or before any initialization
parameters are set that could reasonably be expected to be changed.  In
fact, the pre-initialization process should take care of setting these
parameters.  The code that implements the pre-initialization process
should be written in Lisp and should be called from the Lisp function
@code{normal-top-level}, and the general way that the user customizes
this process should also be done using Lisp code.

@item

The pre-initialization process involves a number of properties, for
example the directory containing the user initialization files (normally
the @code{.xemacs} subdirectory), the name of the user init file, the
name of the custom init file, where and what type the initial device is,
whether and when the initial frame is mapped, etc.  A standard interface
is provided for getting and setting the values of these properties using
functions such as @code{set-pre-init-property},
@code{pre-init-property}, etc.  At various points during the
pre-initialization process, the value of many of these properties can be
undecided, which means that at the end of the process, the value of
these properties will be derived from other properties in some fashion
that is specific to each property.

@item

The default values of these properties are set first from the registry
under Windows, then from environment variables, then from command line
switches, such as @code{-q} and @code{-nw}.

@item

One of the command line switches is @code{-pre-init}, whose value is a
Lisp expression to be evaluated at pre-initialization time, similar to
the @code{-eval} command line switch.  This allows any
pre-initialization property to be set from the command line.

@item

Let's define the term @dfn{to determine a pre-initialization property} to
mean if the value of a property is undetermined, it is computed and set
according to a rule that is specific to the property.  Then after the
pre-init properties are initialized from the registry, from the
environment variables, from command line arguments, two of the pre-init
properties (specifically the init file directory and the location of the
@dfn{pre-init file}) are determined.  The purpose of the pre-init file is
to contain Lisp code that is run at pre-initialization time, and to
control how the initialization proceeds.  It is a bit similar to the
standard init file, but the code in the pre-init file shouldn't do
anything other than set pre-init properties.  Executing any code that
does I/O might not produce expected results because the only device that
will exist at the time is probably a stream device connected to the
standard I/O of the XEmacs process.

@item

After the pre-init file has been run, all of the rest of the pre-init
properties are determined, and these values are then used to control the
initialization process.  Some of the rules used in determining specific
properties are:

@enumerate
@item

If the @code{.xemacs} sub-directory exists, and it's not obviously a
package root (which probably means that it contains a file like
@code{init.el} or @code{pre-init.el}, or if neither of those files is
present, then it doesn't contain any sub-directories or files that look
like what would be in a package root), then it becomes the value of the
init file directory.  Otherwise the user's home directory is used.
@item

If the init file directory is the user's home directory, then the init
file is called @code{.emacs}.  Otherwise, it's called @code{init.el}.
@item

If the init file directory is the user's home directory, then the
pre-init file is called @code{.xemacs-pre-init.el}.  Otherwise it's
called @code{pre-init.el}. (One of the reasons for this rule has to do
with the dialog box that might be displayed at startup.  This will be
described below.)
@item

If the init file directory is the user's home directory, then the custom
init file is called @code{.xemacs-custom-init.el}.  Otherwise, it's
called @code{custom-init.el}.

@end enumerate

@item

After the first normal device is created, but before any frames are
created on it, the XEmacs initialization code checks to see if the old
init file scheme is being used, which is to say that the init file
directory is the same as the user's home directory.  If that's the case,
then normally a dialog box comes up (or a question is asked on the
terminal if XEmacs is being run in a non-windowing mode) which asks if
the user wants to migrate his initialization files to the new scheme.
The possible responses are @strong{Yes}, @strong{No}, and @strong{No,
and don't ask this again}.  If this last response is chosen, then the
file @code{.xemacs-pre-init.el} in the user's home directory is created
or appended to with a line of Lisp code that sets up a pre-init property
indicating that this dialog box shouldn't come up again.  If the
@strong{Yes} option is chosen, then any package root files in
@code{.xemacs} are moved into @code{.xemacs/packages}, the file
@code{.emacs} is moved into @code{.xemacs/init.el} and @code{.emacs} in
the home directory becomes a symlink to this file.  This way some
compatibility is still maintained with GNU Emacs and older versions of
XEmacs.  The code that implements this has to be written very carefully
to make sure that it doesn't accidentally delete or mess up any of the
files that get moved around.

@end enumerate

@subheading The custom init file

The @dfn{custom init file} is where the custom package writes its
options.  This obviously needs to be a separate file from the standard
init file.  It should also be loaded before the init file rather than
after, as is usually done currently, so that the init file can override
these options if it wants to.

@subheading Frame mapping

In addition to the above scheme, the way that XEmacs handles mapping the
initial frame should be changed.  However, this change perhaps should be
delayed to a later version of XEmacs because of the user visible changes
that it entails and the possible breakage in people's init files that
might occur. (For example, if the rest of the scheme is implemented in
21.2, then this part of the scheme might want to be delayed until
version 22.)  The basic idea is that the initial frame is not created
before the initialization file is run, but instead a banner frame is
created containing the XEmacs logo, a button that allows the user to
cancel the execution of the init file and an area where messages that
are output in the process of running this file are displayed.  This area
should contain a number of lines, which makes it better than the current
scheme where only the last message is visible.  After the init file is
done, the initial frame is mapped.  This way the init file can make face
changes and other such modifications that affect initial frame and then
have the initial frame correctly come up with these changes and not see
any frame dancing or other problems that exist currently.

There should be a function that allows the initialization file to
explicitly create and map the first frame if it wants to.  There should
also be a pre-init property that controls whether the banner frame
appears (of course it defaults to true) a property controlling when the
initial frame is created (before or after the init file, defaulting to
after), and a property controlling whether the initial frame is mapped
(normally true, but will be false if the @code{-unmapped} command line
argument is given).

If an error occurs in the init file, then the initial frame should
always be created and mapped at that time so that the error is displayed
and the debugger has a place to be invoked.

@node Future Work -- Keyword Parameters, Future Work -- Property Interface Changes, Future Work -- Better Initialization File Scheme, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Keyword Parameters
@cindex future work, keyword parameters
@cindex keyword parameters, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

NOTE: These changes are partly motivated by the various user-interface
changes elsewhere in this document, and partly for Mule support.  In
general the various APIs in this document would benefit greatly from
built-in keywords.

I would like to make keyword parameters an integral part of Elisp.  The
idea here is that you use the @code{&amp;key} identifier in the
parameter list of a function and all of the following parameters
specified are keyword parameters.  This means that when these arguments
are specified in a function call, they are immediately preceded in the
argument list by a @dfn{keyword}, which is a symbol beginning with the
`:' character.  This allows any argument to be specified independently
of any other argument with no need to place the arguments in any
particular order.  This is particularly useful for functions that take
many optional parameters; using keyword parameters makes the code much
cleaner and easier to understand.

The @code{cl} package already provides keyword parameters of a sort, but
I would like to make this more integrated and useable in a standard
fashion.  The interface that I am proposing is essentially compatible
with the keyword interface in Common Lisp, but it may be a subset of the
Common Lisp functionality, especially in the first implementation.
There is one departure from the Common Lisp specification that I would
like to make in order to make it much easier to add keyword parameters
to existing functions with optional parameters, and in general, to make
optional and keyword parameters coexist more easily.  The Common Lisp
specification indicates that if a function has both optional and keyword
parameters, the optional parameters are always processed before the
keyword parameters.  This means, for example, that if a function has
three required parameters, two optional parameters, and some number of
keyword parameters following, and the program attempts to call this
function by passing in the three required arguments, and then some
keyword arguments, the first keyword specified and the argument
following it get assigned to the first and second optional parameters as
specified in the function definition.  This is certainly not what is
intended, and means that if a function defines both optional and keyword
parameters, any calls of this function must specify @code{nil} for all
of the optional arguments before using any keywords.  If the function
definition is later changed to add more optional parameters, all
existing calls to this function that use any keyword arguments will
break.  This problem goes away if we simply process keyword parameters
before the optional parameters.

The primary changes needed to support the keyword syntax are:

@enumerate
@item

The subr object type needs to be modified to contain additional slots
for the number and names of any keyword parameters.
@item

The implementation of the @code{funcall} function needs to be modified
so that it knows how to process keyword parameters.  This is the only
place that will require very much intricate coding, and much of the
logic that would need to be added can be lifted directly from the
@code{cl} code.
@item

A new macro, similar to the @code{DEFUN} macro, and probably called
@code{DEFUN_WITH_KEYWORDS}, needs to be defined so that built-in Lisp
primitives containing keywords can be created.  Now, the
@code{DEFUN_WITH_KEYWORDS} macro should take an additional parameter
which is a string, which consists of the part of the lambda list
declaration for this primitive that begins with the @code{&amp;key}
specifier.  This string is parsed in the @code{DEFSUBR} macro during
XEmacs initialization, and is converted into the appropriate structure
that needs to be stored into the subr object.  In addition, the
@var{max_args} parameter of the @code{DEFUN} macro needs to be
incremented by the number of keyword parameters and these parameters are
passed to the C function simply as extra parameters at the end.  The
@code{DEFSUBR} macro can sort out the actual number of required,
optional and keyword parameters that the function takes, once it has
parsed the keyword parameter string.  (An alternative that might make
the declaration of a primitive a little bit easier to understand would
involve adding another parameter to the @code{DEFUN_WITH_KEYWORDS} macro
that specifies the number of keyword parameters.  However, this would
require some additional complexity in the preprocessor definition of the
@code{DEFUN_WITH_KEYWORDS} macro, and probably isn't worth
implementing).
@item

The byte compiler would have to be modified slightly so that it knows
about keyword parameters when it parses the parameter declaration of a
function.  For example, so that it issues the correct warnings
concerning calls to that function with incorrect arguments.
@item

The @code{make-docfile} program would have to be modified so that it
generates the correct parameter lists for primitives defined using the
@code{DEFUN_WITH_KEYWORDS} macro.
@item

Possibly other aspects of the help system that deal with function
descriptions might have to be modified.
@item

A helper function might need to be defined to make it easier for
primitives that use both the @code{&amp;rest} and @code{&amp;key}
specifiers to parse their argument lists.

@end enumerate

@subheading Internal API for C primitives with keywords - necessary for many of the new Mule APIs being defined.

@example
  DEFUN_WITH_KEYWORDS (Ffoo, "foo", 2, 5, 6, ALLOW_OTHER_KEYWORDS,
      (ichi, ARG_NIL), (ni, ARG_NIL), (san, ARG_UNBOUND), 0,
      (arg1, arg2, arg3, arg4, arg5)
      )
  @{
    ...
  @}
  
  -> C fun of 12 args:
  
  (arg1, ... arg5, ichi, ..., roku, other keywords)
  
  Circled in blue is actual example declaration
  
  DEFUN_WITH_KEYWORDS (Ffoo, "foo", 1,2,0 (bar, baz) <- arg list
  [ MIN ARGS, MAX ARGS, something that could be REST, SPECIFY_DEFAULT or
  REST_SPEC]
  
  [#KEYWORDS [ ALLOW_OTHER, SPECIFY_DEFAULT, ALLOW_OTHER_SPECIFY_DEFAULT
  6, ALLOW_OTHER_SPECIFY_DEFAULT,
  
  (ichi, 0) (ni, 0), (san, DEFAULT_UNBOUND), (shi, "t"), (go, "5"),
  (roku, "(current-buffer)")
  <- specifies arguments, default values (string to be read into Lisp
     data during init; then forms evalled at fn ref time.
  
  ,0 <- [INTERACTIVE SPEC] )
  
  LO = Lisp_Object
  
  -> LO Ffoo (LO bar, LO baz, LO ichi, LO ni, LO san, LO shi, LO go,
              LO roku, int numkeywords, LO *other_keywords)
  
  #define DEFUN_WITH_KEYWORDS (fun, funstr, minargs, maxargs, argspec, \
           #args, num_keywords, keywordspec, keywords, intspec) \
  LO fun (DWK_ARGS (maxargs, args) \
          DWK_KEYWORDS (num_keywords, keywordspec, keywords))
  
  #define DWK_KEYWORDS (num_keywords, keywordspec, keywords) \
          DWK_KEYWORDS ## keywordspec (keywords)
          DWK_OTHER_KEYWORDS ## keywordspec)
  
  #define DWK_KEYWORDS_ALLOW_OTHER (x,y)
          DWK_KEYWORDS (x,y)
  
  #define DWK_KEYWORDS_ALLOW_OTHER_SPECIFICATIONS (x,y)
          DWK_KEYWORDS_SPECIFY_DEFAULT (x,y)
  
  #define DWK_KEYWORDS_SPECIFY_DEFAULT (numkey, key)
          ARGLIST_CAR ## numkey key
  
  #define ARGLT_GRZ (x,y) LO CAR x, LO CAR y
@end example

@node Future Work -- Property Interface Changes, Future Work -- Toolbars, Future Work -- Keyword Parameters, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Property Interface Changes
@cindex future work, property interface changes
@cindex property interface changes, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

In my past work on XEmacs, I already expanded the standard property
functions of @code{get}, @code{put}, and @code{remprop} to work on
objects other than symbols and defined an additional function
@code{object-plist} for this interface.  I'd like to expand this
interface further and advertise it as the standard way to make property
changes in objects, especially the new objects that are going to be
defined in order to support the added user interface features of version
22.  My proposed changes are as follows:

@enumerate
@item

A new concept associated with each property called a @dfn{default value}
is introduced.  (This concept already exists, but not in a well-defined
way.) The default value is the value that the property assumes for
certain value retrieval functions such as @code{get} when it is
@dfn{unbound}, which is to say that its value has not been explicitly
specified. Note: the way to make a property unbound is to call
@code{remprop}.  Note also that for some built-in properties, setting
the property to its default value is equivalent to making it unbound.
@item

The behavior of the @code{get} function is modified.  If the @code{get}
function is called on a property that is unbound and the third, optional
@var{default} argument is @code{nil}, then the default value of the
property is returned.  If the @var{default} argument is not @code{nil},
then whatever was specified as the value of this argument is returned.
For the most part, this is upwardly compatible with the existing
definition of @code{get} because all user-defined properties have an
initial default value of @code{nil}.  Code that calls the @code{get}
function and specifies @code{nil} for the @var{default} argument, and
expects to get @code{nil} returned if the property is unbound, is almost
certainly wrong anyway.
@item

A new function, @code{get1} is defined.  This function does not take a
default argument like the @code{get} function.  Instead, if the property
is unbound, an error is signaled.  Note: @code{get} can be implemented
in terms of @code{get1}.
@item

New functions @code{property-default-value} and @code{property-bound-p}
are defined with the obvious semantics.
@item

An additional function @code{property-built-in-p} is defined which takes
two arguments, the first one being a symbol naming an object type, and
the second one specifying a property, and indicates whether the property
name has a built-in meaning for objects of that type.
@item

It is not necessary, or even desirable, for all object types to allow
user-defined properties.  It is always possible to simulate user-defined
properties for an object by using a weak hash table.  Therefore, whether
an object allows a user to define properties or not should depend on the
meaning of the object.  If an object does not allow user-defined
properties, the @code{put} function should signal an error, such as
@code{undefined-property}, when given any property other than those that
are predefined.
@item

A function called @code{user-defined-properties-allowed-p} should be
defined with the obvious semantics.  (See the previous item.)
@item

Three more functions should be defined, called
@code{built-in-property-name-list}, @code{property-name-list}, and
@code{user-defined-property-name-list}.

@end enumerate

Another idea:

@example
(define-property-method
  predicate object-type
  predicate cons :(KEYWORD)  (all lists beginning with KEYWORD)

  :put putfun
  :get
  :remprop
  :object-props
  :clear-properties
  :map-properties

  e.g. (define-property-method 'hash-table
         :put #'(lambda (obj key value) (puthash key obj value)))
@end example

@node Future Work -- Toolbars, Future Work -- Menu API Changes, Future Work -- Property Interface Changes, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Toolbars
@cindex future work, toolbars
@cindex toolbars

@menu
* Future Work -- Easier Toolbar Customization::  
* Future Work -- Toolbar Interface Changes::  
@end menu

@node Future Work -- Easier Toolbar Customization, Future Work -- Toolbar Interface Changes, Future Work -- Toolbars, Future Work -- Toolbars
@subsection Future Work -- Easier Toolbar Customization
@cindex future work, easier toolbar customization
@cindex easier toolbar customization, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@strong{Abstract:} One of XEmacs' greatest strengths is its ability to
be customized endlessly.  Unfortunately, it is often too difficult to
figure out how to do this.  There has been some recent work like the
Custom package, which helps in this regard, but I think there's a lot
more work that needs to be done.  Here are some ideas (which certainly
could use some more thought).

Although there is currently an @code{edit-toolbar} package, it is not
well integrated with XEmacs, and in general it is much too hard to
customize the way toolbars look.  I would like to see an interface that
works a bit like the way things work under Windows, where you can
right-click on a toolbar to get a menu of options that allows you to
change aspects of the toolbar.  The general idea is that if you
right-click on an item itself, you can do things to that item, whereas
if you right-click on a blank part of a toolbar, you can change the
properties of the toolbar.  Some of the items on the right-click menu
for a particular toolbar button should be specified by the button
itself.  Others should be standard.  For example, there should be an
@strong{Execute} item which simply does what would happen if you
left-click on a toolbar button.  There should probably be a
@strong{Delete} item to get rid of the toolbar button and a
@strong{Properties} item, which brings up a property sheet that allows
you to do things like change the icon and the command string that's
associated with the toolbar button.

The options to change the appearance of the toolbar itself should
probably appear both on the context menu for specific buttons, and on
the menu that appears when you click on a blank part of the toolbar.
That way, if there isn't a blank part of the toolbar, you can still
change the toolbar appearance.  As for what appears in these items, in
Outlook Express, for example, there are three different menu items, one
of which is called @strong{Buttons}, which brings up, or pops up a
window which allows you to edit the toolbar, which for us could pop up a
new frame, which is running @code{edit-toolbar.el}.  The second item is
called @strong{Align}, which contains a submenu that says @strong{Top},
@strong{Bottom}, @strong{Left}, and @strong{Right}, which will be just
like setting the default toolbar position.  The third one says
@strong{Text Labels}, which would just let you select whether there are
captions or not.  I think all three of these are useful and are easy to
implement in XEmacs.  These things also need to be integrated with
custom so that a user can control whether these options apply to all
sessions, and in such a case can save the settings out to an options
file.  @code{edit-toolbar.el} in particular needs to integrate with
custom.  Currently it has some sort of hokey stuff of its own, which it
saves out to a @code{.toolbar} file.  Another useful option to have,
once we draw the captions dynamically rather than using pre-generated
ones, would be the ability to change the font size of the captions.  I'm
sure that Kyle, for one, would appreciate this.

(This is incomplete.....)

@node Future Work -- Toolbar Interface Changes,  , Future Work -- Easier Toolbar Customization, Future Work -- Toolbars
@subsection Future Work -- Toolbar Interface Changes
@cindex future work, toolbar interface changes
@cindex toolbar interface changes, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

I propose changing the way that toolbars are specified to make them more
flexible.

@enumerate
@item

A new format for the vector that specifies a toolbar item is allowed.
In this format, the first three items of the vector are required and
are, respectively, a caption, a glyph list, and a callback.  The glyph
list and callback arguments are the same as in the current toolbar item
specification, and the caption is a string specifying the caption text
placed below the toolbar glyph.  The caption text is required so that
toolbar items can be identified for the purpose of retrieving and
changing their property values.  Putting the caption first also makes it
easy to distinguish between the new and the old toolbar item vector
formats.  In the old format, the first item, the glyph list, is either a
list or a symbol.  In the new format, the first item is a string.  In
the new format, following the three required items, are optional keyword
items specified using keywords in the same format as the menu item
vector format.  The keywords that should be predefined are:
@code{:help-echo}, @code{:context-menu}, @code{:drop-handlers}, and
@code{:enabled-p}.  The @code{:enabled-p} and @code{:help-echo} keyword
arguments are the same as the third and fourth items in the old toolbar
item vector format.  The @code{:context-menu} keyword is a list in
standard menu format that specifies additional items that will appear
when the context menu for the toolbar item is popped up.  (Typically,
this happens when the right mouse button is clicked on the toolbar
item).  The @code{:drop-handlers} keyword is for use by the new
drag-n-drop interface (see @uref{drag-n-drop.html,Drag-n-Drop Interface
Changes} ), and is not normally specified or modified directly.
@item
      

Conceivably, there could also be keywords that are associated with a
toolbar itself, rather than with a particular toolbar item.  These
keyword properties would be specified using keywords and arguments that
occur before any toolbar item vectors, similarly to how things are done
in menu specifications.  Possible properties could include
@code{:captioned-p} (whether the captions are visible under the
toolbar), @code{:glyphs-visible-p} (whether the toolbar glyphs are
visible), and @code{:context-menu} (additional items that will appear on
the context menus for all toolbar items and additionally will appear on
the context menu that is popped up when the right mouse button is
clicked over a portion of the toolbar that does not have any toolbar
buttons in it).  The current standard practice with regards to such
properties seems to be to have separate specifiers, such as
@code{left-toolbar-width}, @code{right-toolbar-width},
@code{left-toolbar-visible-p}, @code{right-toolbar-visible-p}, etc.  It
could easily be argued that there should be no such toolbar specifiers
and that all such properties should be part of the toolbar instantiator
itself.  In this scheme, the only separate specifiers that would exist
for individual properties would be default values.  There are a lot of
reasons why an interface change like this makes sense.  For example,
currently when VM sets its toolbar, it also sets the toolbar width and
similar properties.  If you change which edge of the frame the VM
toolbar occurs in, VM will also have to go and modify all of the
position-specific toolbar specifiers for all of the other properties
associated with a toolbar.  It doesn't really seem to make sense to me
for the user to be specifying the width and visibility and such of
specific toolbars that are attached to specific edges because the user
should be free to move the toolbars around and expect that all of the
toolbar properties automatically move with the toolbar. (It is also easy
to imagine, for example, that a toolbar might not be attached to the
edge of the frame at all, but might be floating somewhere on the user's
screen).  With an interface where these properties are separate
specifiers, this has to be done manually.  Currently, having the various
toolbar properties be inside of toolbar instantiators makes them
difficult to modify, but this will be different with the API that I
propose below.
@item
      

I propose an API for modifying toolbar and toolbar item properties, as
well as making other changes to toolbar instantiators, such as inserting
or deleting toolbar items.  This API is based around the concept of a
path.  There are two kinds of paths here -- @dfn{toolbar paths} and
@dfn{toolbar item paths}.  Each kind of path is an object (of type
@code{toolbar-path} and @code{toolbar-item-path}, respectively) whose
properties specify the location in a toolbar instantiator where changes
to the instantiator can be made.  A toolbar path, for example, would be
created using the @code{make-toolbar-path} function, which takes a
toolbar specifier (or optionally, a symbol, such as @code{left},
@code{right}, @code{default}, or @code{nil}, which refers to a
particular toolbar), and optionally, parameters such as the locale and
the tag set, which specify which actual instantiator inside of the
toolbar specifier is to be modified.  A toolbar item path is created
similarly using a function called @code{make-toolbar-item-path}, which
takes a toolbar specifier and a string naming the caption of the toolbar
item to be modified, as well as, of course, optionally the locale and
tag set parameters and such.

The usefulness of these path objects is as arguments to functions that
will use them as pointers to the place in a toolbar instantiator where
the modification should be made.  Recall, for example, the generalized
property interface described above.  If a function such as @code{get} or
@code{put} is called on a toolbar path or toolbar item path, it will use
the information contained in the path object to retrieve or modify a
property located at the end of the path.  The toolbar path objects can
also be passed to new functions that I propose defining, such as
@code{add-toolbar-item}, @code{delete-toolbar-item}, and
@code{find-toolbar-item}.  These functions should be parallel to the
functions for inserting, deleting, finding, etc. items in a menu.  The
toolbar item path objects can also be passed to the drop-handler
functions defined in @uref{drag-n-drop.html,Drag-n-Drop Interface
Changes} to retrieve or modify the drop handlers that are associated
with a toolbar item.  (The idea here is that you can drag an object and
drop it onto a toolbar item, just as you could onto a buffer, an extent,
a menu item, or any other graphical element).
@item
      

We should at least think about allowing for separate default and
buffer-local toolbars.  The user should either be able to position these
toolbars one above the other, or side by side, occupying a single
toolbar line.  In the latter case, the boundary between the toolbars
should be draggable, and if a toolbar takes up more room than is
allocated for it, there should be arrows that appear on one or both
sides of the toolbar so that the items in the toolbar can be scrolled
left or right.  (For that matter, this sort of interface should exist
even when there is only one toolbar that is on a particular toolbar
line, because the toolbar may very well have more items than can be
displayed at once, and it's silly in such a case if it's impossible to
access the items that are not currently visible).
@item
      

The default context menu for toolbars (which should be specified using a
specifier called @code{default-toolbar-context-menu} according to the
rules defined above) should contain entries allowing the user to modify
the appearance of a toolbar.  Entries would include, for example,
whether the toolbar is captioned, whether the glyphs for the toolbar are
visible (if the toolbar is captioned but its glyphs are not visible, the
toolbar appears as nothing but text; you can set things up this way, for
example, in Netscape), an option that brings up a package for editing
the contents of a toolbar, an option to allow the caption face to be
dchanged (perhaps thorough jan @code{edit-faces} or @code{custom}
interface), etc.

@end enumerate

@node Future Work -- Menu API Changes, Future Work -- Removal of Misc-User Event Type, Future Work -- Toolbars, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Menu API Changes
@cindex future work, menu API changes
@cindex menu API changes, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@enumerate
@item

I propose making a specifier for the menubar associated with the frame.
The specifier should be called @code{default-menubar} and should replace
the existing @code{current-menubar} variable.  This would increase the
power of the menubar interface and bring it in line with the toolbar
interface.  (In order to provide proper backward compatibility, we might
have to @uref{symbol-value-handlers.html,complete the symbol value
handler mechanism})
@item
      

I propose an API for modifying menu instantiators similar to the API
composed above for toolbar instantiators.  A new object called a
@dfn{menu path} (of type @code{menu-path}) can be created using the
@code{make-menu-path} function, and specifies a location in a particular
menu instantiator where changes can be made.  The first argument to
@code{make-menu-path} specifies which menu to modify and can be a
specifier, a value such as @code{nil} (which means to modify the default
menubar associated with the selected frame), or perhaps some other kind
of specification referring to some other menu, such as the context menus
invoked by the right mouse button.  The second argument to
@code{make-menu-path}, also required, is a list of zero or more strings
that specifies the particular menu or menu item in the instantiator that
is being referred to.  The remaining arguments are optional and would be
a locale, a tag set, etc.  The menu path object can be passed to
@code{get}, @code{put} or other standard property functions to access or
modify particular properties of a menu or a menu item.  It can also be
passed to expanded versions of the existing functions such as
@code{find-menu-item}, @code{delete-menu-item}, @code{add-menu-button},
etc.  (It is really a shame that @code{add-menu-item} is an obsolete
function because it is a much better name than @code{add-menu-button}).
Finally, the menu path object can be passed to the drop-handler
functions described in @uref{drag-n-drop.html,Drag-n-Drop Interface
Changes} to access or modify the drop handlers that are associated with
a particular menu item.
@item
      

New keyword properties should be added to the menu item vector.  These
include @code{:help-echo}, @code{:context-menu} and
@code{:drop-handlers}, with similar semantics to the corresponding
keywords for toolbar items.  (It may seem a bit strange at first to have
a context menu associated with a particular menu item, but it is a user
interface concept that exists both in Open Look and in Windows, and
really makes a lot of sense if you give it a bit of thought).  These
properties may not actually be implemented at first, but at least the
keywords for them should be defined.

@end enumerate

@node Future Work -- Removal of Misc-User Event Type, Future Work -- Mouse Pointer, Future Work -- Menu API Changes, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Removal of Misc-User Event Type
@cindex future work, removal of misc-user event type
@cindex removal of misc-user event type, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@strong{Abstract:} This page describes why the misc-user event type
should be split up into a number of different event types, and how to do
this.

The misc-user event should not exist as a single event type.  It should
be split up into a number of different event types: one for scrollbar
events, one for menu events, and one or two for drag-n-drop events.
Possibly there will be other event types created in the future.  The
reason for this is that the misc-user event was a bad design choice when
I made it, and it has only gotten worse with Oliver's attempts to add
features to it to make it be used for drag-n-drop.  I know that there
was originally a separate drag-n-drop event type, and it was folded into
the misc-user event type on my recommendation, but I have now realized
the error of my ways.  I had originally created a single event type in
an attempt to prevent some Lisp programs from breaking because they
might have a case statement over various event types, and would not be
able to handle new event types appearing.  I think now that these
programs simply need to be written in a way to handle new event types
appearing.  It's not very hard to do this.  You just use predicates
instead of doing a case statement over the event type.  If we preserve
the existing predicate called @code{misc-user-event-p}, and just make
sure that it evaluates to true when given any user event type other than
the standard simple ones, then most existing code will not break either
when we split the event types up like this, or if we add any new event
types in the future.

More specifically, the only clean way to design the misc-user event type
would be to add a sub-type field to it, and then have the nature of all
the other fields in the event type be dependent on this sub-type.  But
then in essence, we'd just be reimplementing the whole event-type scheme
inside of misc-user events, which would be rather pointless.

@node Future Work -- Mouse Pointer, Future Work -- Extents, Future Work -- Removal of Misc-User Event Type, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Mouse Pointer
@cindex future work, mouse pointer
@cindex mouse pointer, future work

@menu
* Future Work -- Abstracted Mouse Pointer Interface::  
* Future Work -- Busy Pointer::  
@end menu

@node Future Work -- Abstracted Mouse Pointer Interface, Future Work -- Busy Pointer, Future Work -- Mouse Pointer, Future Work -- Mouse Pointer
@subsection Future Work -- Abstracted Mouse Pointer Interface
@cindex future work, abstracted mouse pointer interface
@cindex abstracted mouse pointer interface, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@strong{Abstract:} We need to create a new image format that allows
standard pointer shapes to be specified in a way that works on all
Windows systems.  I suggest that this be called @code{pointer}, which
has one tag associated with it, named @code{:data}, and whose value is a
string.  The possible strings that can be specified here are predefined
by XEmacs, and are guaranteed to work across all Windows systems.  This
means that we may need to provide our own definition for pointer shapes
that are not standard on some systems.  In particular, there are a lot
more standard pointer shapes under X than under Windows, and most of
these pointer shapes are fairly useful.  There are also a few pointer
shapes (I think the hand, for example) on Windows, but not on X.
Converting the X pointer shapes to Windows should be easy because the
definitions of the pointer shapes are simply XBM files, which we can
read under Windows.  Going the other way might be a little bit more
difficult, but it should still not be that hard.

While we're at it, we should change the image format currently called
@code{cursor-font} to @code{x-cursor-font}, because it only works under
X Windows.  We also need to change the format called @code{resource} to
be @code{mswindows-resource}.  At least in the case of
@code{cursor-font}, the old value should be maintained for compatibility
as an obsolete alias.  The @code{resource} format was added so recently
that it's possible that we can just change it.

@node Future Work -- Busy Pointer,  , Future Work -- Abstracted Mouse Pointer Interface, Future Work -- Mouse Pointer
@subsection Future Work -- Busy Pointer
@cindex future work, busy pointer
@cindex busy pointer, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

Automatically make the mouse pointer switch to a busy shape (watch
signal) when XEmacs has been "busy" for more than, e.g. 2 seconds.
Define the @dfn{busy time} as the time since the last time that XEmacs was
ready to receive input from the user.  An implementation might be:

@enumerate
@item
Set up an asynchronous timeout, to signal after the busy time; these
are triggered through a call to QUIT so they will be triggered even
when the code is busy doing something.
@item
We already have an "emacs_is_blocking" flag when we are waiting for
input.  In the same place, when we are about to block and wait for
input (regardless of whether input is already present), maybe call a
hook, which in this case would remove the timer and put back the
normal mouse shape.  Then when we exit the blocking stage (we got
some input), call another hook, which in this case will start the
timer.  Note that we don't want these "blocking" hooks to be triggered
just because of an accept-process-output or some similar thing that
retrieves events, only to put them back onto a queue for later
processing.  Maybe we want some sort of flag that's bound by those
routines saying that we aren't really waiting for input.  Making
that flag Lisp-accessible allows it to be set by similar sorts of
Lisp routines (if there are any?) that loop retrieving events but
defer them, or only drain the queue, or whatnot.  #### Think about
whether it would make some sense to try and be more clever in our
determinations of what counts as "real waiting for user input", e.g.
whether the event gets dispatched (unfortunately this occurs way too
late, we want to know to remove the busy cursor @strong{before} getting an
event), maybe whether there are any events waiting to be processed or
we'll truly block, etc. (e.g. one possibility if there is input on
the queue already when we "block" for input, don't remove the busy-
wait pointer, but trigger the removal of it when we dispatch a user
event).
@end enumerate

@node Future Work -- Extents, Future Work -- Version Number and Development Tree Organization, Future Work -- Mouse Pointer, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Extents
@cindex future work, extents
@cindex extents, future work

@menu
* Future Work -- Everything should obey duplicable extents::  
@end menu

@node Future Work -- Everything should obey duplicable extents,  , Future Work -- Extents, Future Work -- Extents
@subsection Future Work -- Everything should obey duplicable extents
@cindex future work, everything should obey duplicable extents
@cindex everything should obey duplicable extents, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

A lot of functions don't properly track duplicable extents.  For
example, the @code{concat} function does, but the @code{format} function
does not, and extents in keymap prompts are not displayed either.  All
of the functions that generate strings or string-like entities should
track the extents that are associated with the strings.  Currently this
is difficult because there is no general mechanism implemented for doing
this.  I propose such a general mechanism, which would not be hard to
implement, and would be easy to use in other functions that build up
strings.

The basic idea is that we create a C structure that is analogous to a
Lisp string in that it contains string data and lists of extents for
that data.  Unlike standard Lisp strings, however, this structure (let's
call it @code{lisp_string_struct}) can be incrementally updated and its
allocation is handled explicitly so that no garbage is generated.  (This
is important for example, in the event-handling code which would want to
use this structure, but needs to not generate any garbage for efficiency
reasons).  Both the string data and the list of extents in this string
are handled using dynarrs so that it is easy to incrementally update
this structure.  Functions should exist to create and destroy instances
of @code{lisp_string_struct} to generate a Lisp string from a
@code{lisp_string_struct} and vice-versa to append a sub-string of a
Lisp string to a @code{lisp_string_struct}, to just append characters to
a @code{lisp_string_struct}, etc.  The only thing possibly tricky about
implementing these functions is implementing the copying of extents from
a Lisp string into a @code{lisp_string_struct}.  However, there is
already a function @code{copy_string_extents()} that does basically this
exact thing, and it should be easy to create a modified version of this
function.

@node Future Work -- Version Number and Development Tree Organization, Future Work -- Improvements to the @code{xemacs.org} Website, Future Work -- Extents, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Version Number and Development Tree Organization
@cindex future work, version number and development tree organization
@cindex version number and development tree organization, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@strong{Abstract:} The purpose of this proposal is to present a coherent
plan for how development branches in XEmacs are managed.  This will
cover such issues as stable versus experimental branches, creating new
branches, synchronizing patches between branches, and how version
numbers are assigned to branches.

A development branch is defined to be a linear series of releases of the
XEmacs code base, each of which is derived from the previous one.  When
the XEmacs development tree is forked and two branches are created where
there used to be one, the branch that is intended to be more stable and
have fewer changes made to it is considered the one that inherits the
parent branch, and the other branch is considered to have begun at the
branching point.  The less stable of the two branches will eventually be
forked again, while this will not happen usually to the more stable of
the two branches, and its development will eventually come to an end.
This means that every branch has a definite ending point.  For example,
the 20.x branch began at the point when the released
19.13 code tree was split into a 19.x and a 20.x branch, and a 20.x
branch will end when the last 20.x release (probably numbered 20.5 or
20.6) is released.

I think that there should always be three active development branches at
any time.  These branches can be designated the stable, the semi-stable,
and the experimental branches.  This situation has existed in the
current code tree as soon as the 21.0 development branch was split.  In
this situation, the stable branch is the 20.x series.  The semi-stable
branch is the 21.0 release and the stability releases that follow.  The
experimental branch is the branch that was created as the result of the
21.0 development branch split.  Typically, the stable branch has been
released for a long period of time.  The semi-stable branch has been
released for a short period of time, or is about to be released, and the
experimental branch has not yet been released, and will probably not be
released for awhile.  The conditions that should hold in all
circumstances are:

@enumerate
@item

There should be three active branches.
@item

The experimental branch should never be in feature freeze.

@end enumerate

The reason for the second condition is to ensure that active development
can always proceed and is never throttled, as is happening currently at
the end of the 21.0 release cycle.  What this means is that as soon as
the experimental branch is deemed to be stable enough to go into feature
freeze:

@enumerate
@item

The current stable branch is made inactive and all further development
on it ceases.
@item

The semi-stable branch, which by now should have been released for a
fair amount of time, and should be fairly stable, gets renamed to the
stable branch.
@item

The experimental branch is forked into two branches, one of which
becomes the semi-stable branch, and the other, the experimental branch.

@end enumerate

The stable branch is always in high resistance, which is to say that the
only changes that can be made to the code are important bug fixes
involving a small amount of code where it should be clear just by
reading the code that no destabilizing code has been introduced.  The
semi-stable branch is in low resistance, which means that no major
features can be added, but except right before a release fairly major
code changes are allowed.  Features can be added if they are
sufficiently small, if they are deemed sufficiently critical due to
severe problems that would exist if the features were not added (for
example, replacement of the unexec mechanism with a portable solution
would be a feature that could be added to the semi-stable branch
provided that it did not involve an overly radical code re-architecture,
because otherwise it might be impossible to build XEmacs on some
architectures or with some compilers), or if the primary purpose of the
new feature is to remedy an incompleteness in a recent architectural
change that was not finished in a prior release due to lack of time (for
example, abstracting the mouse pointer and list-of-colors interfaces,
which were left out of 21.0).  There is no feature resistance in place
in the experimental branch, which allows full development to proceed at
all times.

In general, both the stable and semi-stable branches will contain
previous net releases.  In addition, there will be beta releases in all
three branches, and possibly development snapshots between the beta
releases.  It's obviously necessary to have a good version numbering
scheme in order to keep everything straight.

First of all, it needs to be immediately clear from the version number
whether the release is a beta release or a net release.  Steve has
proposed getting rid of the beta version numbering system, which I think
would be a big mistake.  Furthermore, the net release version number and
beta release version number should be kept separate, just as they are
now, to make it completely clear where any particular release stands.
There may be alternate ways of phrasing a beta release other than
something like 21.0 beta 34, but in all such systems, the beta number
needs to be zero for any release version.  Three possible alternative
systems, none of which I like very much, are:

@enumerate
@item

The beta number is simply an extra number in the regular version number.
Then, for example, 21.0 beta 34 becomes 21.0.34.  The problem is that
the release version, which would simply be called 21.0, appears to be
earlier than 21.0 beta 34.
@item

The beta releases appear as later revisions of earlier releases.  Then,
for example, 21.1 beta 34 becomes 21.0.34, and 21.0 beta 34 would have
to become 21.-1.34.  This has both the obvious ugliness of negative
version numbers and the problem that it makes beta releases appear to be
associated with their previous releases, when in fact they are more
closely associated with the following release.
@item

Simply make the beta version number be negative.  In this scheme, you'd
start with something like -1000 as the first beta, and then 21.0 beta 34
would get renumbered to 21.0.-968.  Obviously, this is a crazy and
convoluted scheme as well, and we would be best to avoid it.

@end enumerate

Currently, the between-beta snapshots are not numbered, but I think that
they probably should be.  If appropriate scripts are handled to automate
beta release, it should be very easy to have a version number
automatically updated whenever a snapshot is made.  The number could be
added either as a separate snapshot number, and you'd have 21.0 beta 34
pre 1, which becomes before 21.0 beta 34; or we could make the beta
number be floating point, and then the same snapshot would have to be
called 21.0 beta 33.1.  The latter solution seems quite kludgey to me.

There also needs to be a clear way to distinguish, when a net release is
made, which branch the release is a part of.  Again, three solutions
come to mind:

@enumerate
@item

The major version number reflects which development branch the release
is in and the minor version number indicates how many releases have been
made along this branch.  In this scheme, 21.0 is always the first
release of the 21 series development branch, and when this branch is
split, the child branch that becomes the experimental branch gets
version numbers starting with 22.  This scheme is the simplest, and it's
the one I like best.
@item

We move to a three-part version number.  In this scheme, the first two
numbers indicate the branch, and the third number indicates the release
along the branch.  In this scheme, we have numbers like 21.0.1, which
would be the second release in the 21.0 series branch, and 21.1.2, which
would be the third release in the
21.1 series branch.  The major version number then gets increased
only very occasionally, and only when a sufficiently major architectural
change has been made, particularly one that causes compatibility
problems with code written for previous branches.  I think schemes like
this are unnecessary in most circumstances, because usually either the
major version number ends up changing so often that the second number is
always either zero or one, or the major version number never changes,
and as such becomes useless.  By the time the major version number would
change, the product itself has changed so much that it often gets
renamed.  Furthermore, it is clear that the two version number scheme
has been used throughout most of the history of Emacs, and recently we
have been following the two number scheme also.  If we introduced a
third revision number, at this point it would both confuse existing code
that assumed there were two numbers, and would look rather silly given
that the major version number is so high and would probably remain at
the same place for quite a long time.
@item

A third scheme that would attempt to cross the two schemes would keep
the same concept of major version number as for the three number scheme,
and would compress the second and third numbers of the three number
scheme into one number by using increments of ten.  For example, the
current 21.x branch would have releases No. 21.0, 21.1, etc.  The next
branch would be No. 21.10, 21.11, etc.  I don't like this scheme very
much because it seems rather kludgey, and also because it is not used in
any other product as far as I know.
@item

Another scheme that would combine the second and third numbers in the
three number scheme would be to have the releases in the current 21.x
series be numbered 21.0, then 21.01, then 22.02, etc.  The next series
is 21.1, then 21.11, then 21.12, etc.  This is similar to the way that
version numbers are done for DOS in Windows.  I also think that this
scheme is fairly silly because, like the previous scheme, its only
purpose is to avoid increasing the major version number very much.  But
given that we have already have a fairly large major version number,
there doesn't seem to be any particular problem with increasing this
number by one every year or two.  Some people will object that by doing
this, it becomes impossible to tell when a change is so major that it
causes a lot of code breakage, but past releases have not been accurate
indicators of this.  For example,
19.12 caused a lot of code breakage, but 20.0 caused less, and 21.0
caused less still.  In the GNU Emacs world, there were byte code changes
made between 19.28 and 19.29, but as far as I know, not between 19.29
and 20.0.

@end enumerate

With three active development branches, synchronizing code changes
between the branches is obviously somewhat of a problem.  To make things
easier, I propose a few general guidelines:

@enumerate
@item

Merging between different branches need not happen that often.  It
should not happen more often than necessary to avoid undue burden on the
maintainer, but needs to be done at all defined checkpoints.  These
checkpoints need to be noted in all of the places that track changes
along the branch, for example, in all of the change logs and in all of
the CVS tags.
@item

Every code change that can be considered a self-contained unit, no
matter how large or small, needs to have a change log entry, preferably
a single change log entry associated with it.  This is an absolute
requirement.  There should be no code changes without an associated
change log entry.  Otherwise, it is highly likely that patches will not
be correctly synchronized across all versions, and will get lost.  There
is no need for change log entries to contain unnecessary detail though,
and it is important that there be no more change log entries than
necessary, which means that two or more change log entries associated
with a single patch need to be grouped together if possible.  This might
imply that there should be one global change log instead of change logs
in each directory, or at the very least, the number of separate change
logs should be kept to a minimum.
@item

The patch that is associated with each change log entry needs to be kept
around somewhere.  The reason for this is that when synchronizing code
from some branch to some earlier branch, it is necessary to go through
each change log entry and decide whether a change is worthy to make it
into a more stable branch.  If so, the patch associated with this change
needs to be individually applied to the earlier branch.
@item

All changes made in more stable branches get merged into less stable
branches unless the change really is completely unnecessary in the less
stable branch because it is superseded by some other change.  This will
probably mean more developers making changes to the semi-stable branch
than to the experimental branch.  This means that developers should
strive to do their development in the most stable branch that they
expect their code to go into.  An alternative to this which is perhaps
more workable is simply to insist that all developers make all patches
based off of the experimental branch, and then later merge these patches
down to the more stable branches as necessary.  This means, however,
that submitted patches should never be combinations of two or more
unrelated changes.  Whenever such patches are submitted, they should
either be rejected (which should apply to anybody who should know
better, which probably means everybody on the beta list and anybody else
who is a regular contributor), or the maintainer or some other
designated party needs to filter the combined patch into separate
patches, one per logical change.
@item

The maintainer should keep all the patches around in some data base, and
the patches should be given an identifier consisting of the author of
the patch, the date the patch was submitted, and some other identifying
characteristic, such as a number, in case there is more than one patch
on the same date by the same author.  The database should hopefully be
correctly marked at all times with something indicating which branches
the patch has been applied to, and this database should hopefully be
publicly visible so that patch authors can determine whether their
patches have been applied, and whether their patches have been received,
so that patches do not get needlessly resubmitted.
@item

Global automatable changes such as textual renaming, reordering, and
additions or deletions of parameters in function calls should still be
allowed, even with multiple development branches.  (Sometimes these are
necessary for code cleanliness, and in the long run, they save a lot of
time, even through they may cause some headaches in the short-term.)  In
general, when such changes are made, they should occur in a separate
beta version that contains only such changes and no other patches, and
the changes should be made in both the semi-stable and experimental
branches at the same time.  The description of the beta version should
make it very clear that the beta is comprised of such changes.  The
reason for doing these things is to make it easier for people to diff
between beta versions in order to figure out the changes that were made
without the diff getting cluttered up by these code cleanliness changes
that don't change any actual behavior.

@end enumerate

@node Future Work -- Improvements to the @code{xemacs.org} Website, Future Work -- Keybindings, Future Work -- Version Number and Development Tree Organization, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Improvements to the @code{xemacs.org} Website
@cindex future work, improvements to the @code{xemacs.org} website
@cindex improvements to the @code{xemacs.org} website, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

The @code{xemacs.org} web site is the face that XEmacs presents to the
outside world.  In my opinion, its most important function is to present
information about XEmacs in such a way that solicits new XEmacs users
and co-contributors.  Existing members of the XEmacs community can
probably find out most of the information they want to know about XEmacs
regardless of what shape the web site is in, or for that matter, perhaps
even if the web site doesn't exist at all.  However, potential new users
and co-contributors who go to the XEmacs web site and find it out of
date and/or lacking the information that they need are likely to be
turned away and may never return.  For this reason, I think it's
extremely important that the web site be up-to-date, well-organized, and
full of information that an inquisitive visitor is likely to want to
know.

The current XEmacs web site needs a lot of work if it is to meet these
standards.  I don't think it's reasonable to expect one person to do all
of this work and make continual updates as needed, especially given the
dismal record that the XEmacs web site has had.  The proper thing to do
is to place the web site itself under CVS and allow many of the core
members to remotely check files in and out.  This way, for example,
Steve could update the part of the site that contains the current
release status of XEmacs. (Much of this could be done by a script that
Steve executes when he sends out a beta release announcement which
automatically HTML-izes the mail message and puts it in the appropriate
place on the web site.  There are programs that are specifically
designed to convert email messages into HTML, for example
@code{mhonarc}.)  Meanwhile, the @code{xemacs.org} mailing list
administrator (currently Jason Mastaler, I think) could maintain the
part of the site that describes the various mailing lists and other
addresses at @code{xemacs.org}.  Someone like me (perhaps through a
proxy typist) could maintain the part of the site that specifies the
future directions that XEmacs is going in, etc., etc.

Here are some things that I think it's very important to add to the web
site.

@enumerate
@item

A page describing in detail how to get involved in the XEmacs
development process, how to submit and where to submit various patches
to the XEmacs core or associated packages, how to contact the
maintainers and core developers of XEmacs and the maintainers of various
packages, etc.
@item

A page describing exactly how to download, compile, and install XEmacs,
and how to download and install the various binary distributions.  This
page should particularly cover in detail how exactly the package system
works from an installation standpoint and how to correctly compile and
install under Microsoft Windows and Cygwin.  This latter section should
cover what compilers are needed under Microsoft Windows and Cygwin, and
how to get and install the Cygwin components that are needed.
@item

A page describing where to get the various ancillary libraries that can
be linked with XEmacs, such as the JPEG, TIFF, PNG, X-Face, DBM, and
other libraries.  This page should also cover how to correctly compile
it and install these libraries, including under Microsoft Windows (or at
least it should contain pointers to where this information can be
found).  Also, it should describe anything that needs to be specified as
an option to @code{configure} in order for XEmacs to link with and make
use of these libraries or of Motif or CDE.  Finally, this page should
list which versions of the various libraries are required for use with
the various different beta versions of XEmacs.  (Remember, this can
change from beta to beta, and someone needs to keep a watchful eye on
this).
@item

Pointers to any other sites containing information on XEmacs.  This
would include, for example, Hrvoje's XEmacs on Windows FAQ and my
Architecting XEmacs web site.  (Presumably, most of the information in
this section will be temporary.  Eventually, these pages should be
integrated into the main XEmacs web site).
@item

A page listing the various sub-projects in the XEmacs development
process and who is responsible for each of these sub-projects, for
example development of the package system, administration of the mailing
lists, maintenance of stable XEmacs versions, maintenance of the CVS web
interface, etc.  This page should also list all of the packages that are
archived at @code{xemacs.org} and who is the maintainer or maintainers
for each of these packages.

@end enumerate

@subheading Other Places with an XEmacs Presence

We should try to keep an XEmacs presence in all of the major places on
the web that are devoted to free software or to the "open source"
community.  This includes, for example, the open source web site at
@uref{../../opensource.oreilly.com/default.htm,http://opensource.oreilly.com}
(I'm already in the process of contacting this site), the Freshmeat site
at @uref{../../www.freshmeat.net/default.htm,http://www.freshmeat.net},
the various announcement news groups (for example,
@uref{news:comp.os.linux.announce,comp.os.linux.announce}, and the
Windows announcement news group) etc.

@node Future Work -- Keybindings, Future Work -- Byte Code Snippets, Future Work -- Improvements to the @code{xemacs.org} Website, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Keybindings
@cindex future work, keybindings
@cindex keybindings, future work

@menu
* Future Work -- Keybinding Schemes::  
* Future Work -- Better Support for Windows Style Key Bindings::  
* Future Work -- Misc Key Binding Ideas::  
@end menu

@node Future Work -- Keybinding Schemes, Future Work -- Better Support for Windows Style Key Bindings, Future Work -- Keybindings, Future Work -- Keybindings
@subsection Future Work -- Keybinding Schemes
@cindex future work, keybinding schemes
@cindex keybinding schemes, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@strong{Abstract:} We need a standard mechanism that allows a different
global key binding schemes to be defined.  Ideally, this would be the
@uref{keyboard-actions.html,keyboard action interface} that I have
proposed, however this would require a lot of work on the part of mode
maintainers and other external Elisp packages and will not be rady in
the short term.  So I propose a very kludgy interface, along the lines
of what is done in Viper currently.  Perhaps we can rip that key munging
code out of Viper and make a separate extension that implements a global
key binding scheme munging feature.  This way a key binding scheme could
rearrange all the default keys and have all sorts of other code, which
depends on the standard keys being in their default location, still
work.

@node Future Work -- Better Support for Windows Style Key Bindings, Future Work -- Misc Key Binding Ideas, Future Work -- Keybinding Schemes, Future Work -- Keybindings
@subsection Future Work -- Better Support for Windows Style Key Bindings
@cindex future work, better support for windows style key bindings
@cindex better support for windows style key bindings, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@strong{Abstract:} This page describes how we could create an XEmacs
extension that modifies the global key bindings so that a Windows user
would feel at home when using the keyboard in XEmacs.  Some of these
bindings don't conflict with standard XEmacs keybindings and should be
added by default, or at the very least under Windows, and probably under
X Windows as well. Other key bindings would need to be implemented in a
Windows compatibility extension which can be enabled and disabled on the
fly, following the conventions outlined in
@uref{enabling-extensions.html,Standard interface for enabling
extensions} Ideally, this should be implemented using the
@uref{keyboard-actions.html,keyboard action interface} but these wil not
be available in the short term, so we will have to resort to some awful
kludges, following the model of Michael Kifer's Viper mode.

We really need to make XEmacs provide standard Windows key bindings as
much as possible.  Currently, for example, there are at least two
packages that allow the user to make a selection using the shifted arrow
keys, and neither package works all that well, or is maintained.  There
should be one well-written piece of code that does this, and it should
be a standard part of XEmacs.  In fact, it should be turned on by
default under Windows, and probably under X as well. (As an aside here,
one point of contention in how to implement this involves what happens
if you select a region using the shifted arrow keys and then hit the
regular arrow keys.  Does the region remain selected or not?  I think
there should be a variable that controls which of these two behaviors
you want.  We can argue over what the default value of this variable
should be.  The standard Windows behavior here is to keep the region
selected, but move the insertion point elsewhere, which is unfortunately
impossible to implement in XEmacs.)

Some thought should be given to what to do about the standard Windows
control and alt key bindings.  Under NTEmacs, there is a variable that
controls whether the alt key behaves like the Emacs meta key, or whether
it is passed on to the menu as in standard Windows programs.  We should
surely implement this and put this option on the @strong{Options} menu.
Making @kbd{Alt-f} for example, invoke the @strong{File} menu, is not
all that disruptive in XEmacs, because the user can always type @kbd{ESC
f} to get the meta key functionality.  Making @kbd{Control-x}, for
example, do @strong{Cut}, is much, much more problematic, of course, but
we should consider how to implement this anyway.  One possibility would
be to move all of the current Emacs control key bindings onto
control-shift plus a key, and to make the simple control keys follow the
Windows standard as much as possible.  This would mean, for example,
that we would have the following keybindings:@* @kbd{Control-x} ==>
@strong{Cut} @* @kbd{Control-c} ==> @strong{Copy} @* @kbd{Control-v} ==>
@strong{Paste} @* @kbd{Control-z} ==> @strong{Undo}@* @kbd{Control-f}
==> @strong{Find} @* @kbd{Control-a} ==> @strong{Select All}@*
@kbd{Control-s} ==> @strong{Save}@* @kbd{Control-p} ==> @strong{Print}@*
@kbd{Control-y} ==> @strong{Redo}@* (this functionality @emph{is}
available in XEmacs with Kyle Jones' @code{redo.el} package, but it
should be better integrated)@* @kbd{Control-n} ==> @strong{New} @*
@kbd{Control-o} ==> @strong{Open}@* @kbd{Control-w} ==> @strong{Close
Window}@*

The changes described in the previous paragraph should be put into an
extension named @code{windows-keys.el} (see
@uref{enabling-extensions.html,Standard interface for enabling
extensions}) so that it can be enabled and disabled on the fly using a
menu item and can be selected as the default for a particular user in
their custom options file. Once this is implemented, the Windows
installer should also be modified so that it brings up a dialog box that
allows the user to make a selection of which key binding scheme they
would prefer as the default, either the XEmacs standard bindings, Vi
bindings (which would be Viper mode), Windows-style bindings, Brief,
CodeWright, Visual C++, or whatever we manage to implement.

@node Future Work -- Misc Key Binding Ideas,  , Future Work -- Better Support for Windows Style Key Bindings, Future Work -- Keybindings
@subsection Future Work -- Misc Key Binding Ideas
@cindex future work, misc key binding ideas
@cindex misc key binding ideas, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@itemize
@item
M-123 ... do digit arg

@item
However, M-( group commands together until M-)

@item
Nested M-() are allowed.

@item
Number repeating plus () repeats N times each group of commands as a
unit.

@item
M-() by itself forms an anonymous macro, and there should be a
command to repeat, like VI (execute macro), but when no () before,
it repeats the last command of same amount of complication - or more
like, somewhere there is a repeats all command back to make to act
that stopping like VI's dot command.

@item
C-numbers switches to a particular window.  maybe 1-3 or 1-4 does
this.

@item
C-4 or 5 to 9 (or ()? maybe reserved) switches to a particular frame.

@item
Possibly C-Sh-numbers select more windows or frames.

@item
M-C-1
M-C-2
M-C-3
M-C-4
M-C-5
M-C-6
M-C-7
M-C-8
M-C-9
M-C-0

maybe should be execute anonymous macros (other possibility is insert
register but you can easily simulate with a keyboard macro)

@item
What about C-S M-C-S M-S??

@item
I think there should be default fun key binding for @strong{ILLEGIBLE}
similar to what I have - load, save, cut, copy, paste, kill line,
start/end macro, do macro
@end itemize

@node Future Work -- Byte Code Snippets, Future Work -- Lisp Stream API, Future Work -- Keybindings, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Byte Code Snippets
@cindex future work, byte code snippets
@cindex byte code snippets, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@itemize
@item
For use in time critical (e.g. redisplay) places such as display
tables - a simple piece of code is evalled, e.g.
@example
(int-to-char (1+ c))
@end example
where c is the arg, specbound.

@item
can be compiled like
@example
(byte-compile-snippet (int-to-char (1+ c)) (c))
                                           ^^^
                                environment of local vars
@end example

@item
need eval with bindings (not hard to implement)
(extendable when lexical scoping present)

@item
What's the return value of byte-compile-snippet?
(Look to see how this might be implemented)
@end itemize

@menu
* Future Work -- Autodetection::  
* Future Work -- Conversion Error Detection::  
* Future Work -- Unicode::      
* Future Work -- BIDI Support::  
* Future Work -- Localized Text/Messages::  
@end menu

@node Future Work -- Autodetection, Future Work -- Conversion Error Detection, Future Work -- Byte Code Snippets, Future Work -- Byte Code Snippets
@subsection Future Work -- Autodetection
@cindex future work, autodetection
@cindex autodetection, future work

There are various proposals contained here.

@subheading New Implementation of Autodetection Mechanism

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

The current auto detection mechanism in XEmacs Mule has many
problems. For one thing, it is wrong too much of the time. Another
problem, although easily fixed, is that priority lists are fixed rather
than varying, depending on the particular locale; and finally, it
doesn't warn the user when it's not sure of the encoding or when there's
a mistake made during decoding. In both of these situations the user
should be presented with a list of likely encodings and given the
choice, rather than simply proceeding anyway and giving a result that is
likely to be wrong and may result in data corruption when the file is
saved out again.

All coding systems are categorized according to their type. Currently
this includes ISO2022, Big 5, Shift-JIS, UTF8 and a few others. In
the future there will be many more types defined and this mechanism
will be generalized so that it is easily extendable by the Lisp
programmer.

In general, each coding system type defines a series of subtypes which
are handled differently for the purpose of detection. For example, ISO
2022 defines many different subtypes such as 7 bit, 8 bit, locking
shift, designating and so on. UCS2 may define subtypes such as normal
and byte reversed.

The detection engine works conceptually by calling the detection
methods of all of the defined coding system types in parallel on
successive chunks of data (which may, for example, be 4K in size, but
where the size makes no difference except for optimization purposes)
and watching the results until either a definite answer is determined
or the end of data is reached. The way the definite answer is
determined will be defined below. The detection method of the coding
system type is passed some data and a chunk of memory, which the
method uses to store its current state (and which is maintained
separately for each coding system type by the detection engine between
successive calls to the coding system type's detection method). Its
return value should be an alist consisting of a list of all of the
defined subtypes for that coding system type along with a level of
likelihood and a list of additional properties indicating certain
features detected in the data. The extra properties returned are
defined entirely by the particular coding system type and are used
only in the algorithm described below under "user control." However,
the levels of likelihood have a standard meaning as follows:

Level 4 means "near certainty" and typically indicates that a
signature has been detected, usually at the beginning of the data,
indicating that the data is encoded in this particular coding system
type. An example of this would be the byte order mark at the beginning
of UCS2 encoded data or the GZIP mark at the beginning of GZIP data.

Level 3 means "highly likely" and indicates that tell-tale signs have
been discovered in the data that are characteristic of this particular
coding system type. Examples of this might be ISO 2022 escape
sequences or the current Unicode end of line markers at regular
intervals.

Level 2 means "strongly statistically likely" indicating that
statistical analysis concludes that there's a high chance that this
data is encoded according to this particular type. For example, this
might mean that for UCS2 data, there is a high proportion of null bytes
or other repeated bytes in the odd-numbered bytes of the data and a
high variance in the even-numbered bytes of the data. For Shift-JIS,
this might indicate that there were no illegal Shift-JIS sequences
and a fairly high occurrence of common Shift-JIS characters.

Level 1 means "weak statistical likelihood" meaning that there is some
indication that the data is encoded in this coding system type. In
fact, there is a reasonable chance that it may be some other type as
well. This means, for example, that no illegal sequences were
encountered and at least some data was encountered that is purposely
not in other coding system types. For Shift-JIS data, this might mean
that some bytes in the range 128 to 159 were encountered in the data.

Level 0 means "neutral" which is to say that there's either not enough
data to make any decision or that the data could well be interpreted
as this type (meaning no illegal sequences), but there is little or no
indication of anything particular to this particular type.

Level -1 means "weakly unlikely" meaning that some data was
encountered that could conceivably be part of the coding system type
but is probably not. For example, successively long line-lengths or
very rarely-encountered sequences.

Level -2 means "strongly unlikely" meaning that typically a number
of illegal sequences were encountered.

The algorithm to determine when to stop and indicate that the data has
been detected as a particular coding system uses a priority list,
which is typically specified as part of the language environment
determined from the current locale or the user's choice. This priority
list consists of a list of coding system subtypes, along with a
minimum level required for positive detection and optionally
additional properties that need to be present. Using the return values
from all of the detection methods called, the detection engine looks
through this priority list until it finds a positive match. In this
priority list, along with each subtype is a particular coding system
to return when the subtype is encountered. (For example, in a
Japanese-language environment particular subtypes of ISO 2022 will be
associated with the Japanese coding system version of those
subtypes). It is perfectly legal and quite common in fact, to list the
same subtype more than once in the priority list with successively
lower requirements. Other facts that can be listed in the priority
list for a subtype are "reject", meaning that the data should never be
detected as this subtype, or "ask", meaning that if the data is
detected to be this subtype, the user will be asked whether they
actually mean this. This latter property could be used, for example,
towards the bottom of the priority list.

In addition there is a global variable which specifies the minimum
number of characters required before any positive match is
reported. There may actually be more than one such variable for
different sources of data, for example, detection of files versus
detection of subprocess data.

Whenever a file is opened and detected to be a particular coding
system, the subtype, the coding system and the associated level of
likelihood will be prominently displayed either in the echo area or in
a status box somewhere.

If no positive match is found according to the priority list, or if
the matches that are found have the "ask" property on them, then the
user will be presented with a list of choices of possible encodings
and asked to choose one. This list is typically sorted first by level
of likelihood, and then within this, by the order in which the
subtypes appear in the priority list. This list is displayed in a
special kind of dialog box or other buffer allowing the user, in
addition to just choosing a particular encoding, to view what the
file would look like if it were decoded according to the type.

Furthermore, whenever a file is decoded according to a particular
type, the decoding engine keeps track of status values that are output
by the coding system type's decoding method. Generally, this status
will be in the form of errors or warnings of various levels, some of
which may be severe enough to stop the decoding entirely, and some of
which may either indicate definitely malformed data but from which
it's possible to recover, or simply data that appears rather
questionable. If any of these status values are reported during
decoding, the user will be informed of this and asked "are you sure?"
As part of the "are you sure" dialog box or question, the user can
display the results of the decoding to make sure it's correct. If the
user says "no, they're not sure," then the same list of choices as
previously mentioned will be presented.

@subheading RFC: Autodetection

Also appeared under heading "Implementation of Coding System Priority
Lists in Various Locales" ?

Author: @uref{mailto:stephen@@xemacs.org,Stephen Turnbull}

Date: 11/1/1999 2:48 AM

@example
>>>>> "Hrvoje" == Hrvoje Niksic <hniksic@@srce.hr> writes:

    [Ben sez:]

    >> You are perfectly free to set up your XEmacs like this, but
    >> XEmacs/Mule @strong{will} autodetect by default if there is no
    >> Content-Type: info and no reason to believe we are dealing with
    >> binary files.

    Hrvoje> In that case, it will be a serious mistake to make
    Hrvoje> --with-mule the default, ever.  I think more care should
    Hrvoje> be shown in meeting the need of European users.
@end example

Hrvoje, I don't understand what you are worrying about.  I suspect you
are worrying about Handa's hyperactive and obstinate Mule, not what
Ben has in mind.  Yes, Ben has said "better guessing," but that's
simply not reasonable without substantial language environment
information.  I think trying to detect Latin-1 vs Latin-2 in the POSIX
locale would be a big mistake, I think trying to guess Big 5 v. Shift
JIS in a European locale would be a big mistake.

If Ben doesn't mean "more appropriate use of language environment
information" when he writes "better guessing," I, as much as you, want
to see how he plans to do that.  Ben?  ("Yes/no/oops I need to think
about it" is good enough if you have specifics you intend to put in
the RFC you're planning to present.)

Let me give a formal proposal of what I would like to see in the
autodetection specification.

@enumerate
@item
Definitions

@enumerate
@item
@dfn{Autodetection} means detecting and making available to Mule
the external file's encoding.  See (5), below.  It doesn't
imply any specific actions based on that information.

@item
The @dfn{default} case is POSIX locale, and no environment
information in ~/.emacs.

N.B.  This @strong{will} cause breakage for all 1-byte users because
the default case can no longer assume Latin-1.  You @strong{may} be
able to use the TTY font or the Xt -font option to fake this,
and default to iso8859-1; I would hope that we would not use
such a kludge in the beta versions, although it might be
satisfactory for general use.  In particular, encodings like
VISCII (Vietnamese) and I believe KOI-8 (Cyrillic) are not
ISO-2022-clean, but using C1 control characters as a heuristic
for detecting binary files is useful.

If we do allow it, I think that XEmacs should bitch and warn
that the practices of implicitly specifying language
environment by -font and defaulting on TTYs is deprecated and
likely to be obsoleted.

@item
The @dfn{European} case is any Latin-* locale, either implied by
setlocale() and friends or set in ~/.emacs.  Latin-1 is
specifically not given precedence over other Latin-*, or
non-Latin or non-ISO-8859 for that matter.  I suspect but am
not sure that this case extends to all ISO-8859 encodings, and
possibly to non-ISO-8859 single-byte encodings like KOI-8r (in
particular when combined in a class with ISO-8859 encodings).

@item
The @dfn{CJK} case is any CJK locale.  Japanese is specifically
not given precedence over other Asian locales.

@item
For completeness, define the @dfn{Unicode} case (Unicode
unfortunately has lots of junk such as precomposed characters,
language tags, and directionality indicators in it; we
probably don't care yet, but we should also not claim
compliance) and the @dfn{general} case (which has a lot of
features similar to Unicode, but lacks the advantage of a
unified encoding).  This proposal has no idea how to handle
the special features of these, or even if that matters.  The
general case includes stuff that nobody here really knows how
it works, like Tibetan and Ethiopic.
@end enumerate

Each of the following cases is given in the order of priority of
detection.  I'm not sure I'm serious about the top priority given the
(optional) Unicode detection.  This may be appropriate if Ben is
right that ISO-2022 is going to disappear, but possibly not until then
(two two-byte sequences out of 65536 is probably 1.99 too many).  It
probably isn't too risky if (6)(c) is taken pretty seriously; a Unicode
file should contain _no_ private use characters unless the encoding is
explicitly specified, and that's a block of 1/10 of the code space,
which should help a lot in detecting binary files.

@item
Default locale

@enumerate
@item
Some Unicode (fixed width; maybe UTF-8, too?) may optionally
be detected by the byte-order-mark magic (if the first two
bytes are 0xFE 0xFF, the file is Unicode text, if 0xFF 0xFE,
it is wrong-endian Unicode; if legal in UTF-8, it would be
0xFE 0xBB 0xBF, either-endian).  This is probably an
optimization that should not be on by default yet.

@item
ISO-2022 encodings will be detected as long as they use
explicit designation of all non-ASCII character sets.  This
means that many 7-bit ISO-2022 encodings would be detected
(eg, ISO-2022-JP), but EUC-JP and X Compound Text would not,
because they implicitly designate character sets.

N.B. Latin-1 will be detected as binary, as for any Latin-*.

N.B. An explicit ISO-2022 designation is semantically
equivalent to a Content-Type: header.  It is more dangerous
because shorter, but I think we should recognize them by
default despite the slight risk; XEmacs is a text editor.

N.B. This is unlikely to be as dangerous as it looks at first
glance.  Any file that includes an 8-bit-set byte before the
first valid designation should be detected as binary.

@item
Binary files will be detected (eg, presence of NULs, other
non-whitespace control characters, absurdly long lines, and
presence of bytes >127).

@item
Everything else is ASCII.

@item
Newlines will be detected in text files.
@end enumerate

@item
European locales

@enumerate
@item
Unicode may optionally be detected by the byte-order-mark
magic.

@item
ISO-2022 encodings will be detected as long as they use
explicit designation of all non-ASCII character sets.

@item
A locale-specific class of 1-byte character sets (eg,
'(Latin-1)) will be detected.

N.B.  The reason for permitting a class is for cases like
Cyrillic where there are both ISO-8859 encodings and
incompatible encodings (KOI-8r) in common use.  If you want to
write a Latin-1 v. Latin-2 detector, be my guest, but I don't
think it would be easy or accurate.

@item
Binary files will be detected per (2)(c), except that only
8-bit bytes out of the encoding's range imply binary.

@item
Everything else is ASCII.

@item
Newlines will be detected in text files.
@end enumerate

@item
CJK locales

@enumerate
@item
Unicode may optionally be detected by the byte-order-mark
magic.

@item
ISO-2022 encodings will be detected as long as they use
explicit designation of all non-ASCII character sets.

@item
A locale-specific class of multi-byte and wide-character
encodings will be detected.
N.B. No 1-byte character sets (eg, Latin-1) will be detected.
The reason for a class is to allow the Japanese to let Mule do
the work of choosing EUC v. SJIS.

@item
Binary files will be detected per (3)(d).

@item
Everything else is ASCII.

@item
Newlines will be detected in text files.
@end enumerate

@item
Unicode and general locales; multilingual use

@enumerate
@item
Hopefully a system general enough to handle (2)--(4) will
handle these, too, but we should watch out for gotchas like
Unicode "plane 14" tags which (I think _both_ Ben and Olivier
will agree) have no place in the internal representation, and
thus must be treated as out-of-band control sequences.  I
don't know if all such gotchas will be as easy to dispose of.

@item
An explicit coding system priority list will be provided to
allow multilingual users to autodetect both Shift JIS and Big
5, say, but this ability is not promised by Mule, since it
would involve (eg) heuristics like picking a set of code
points that are frequent in Shift JIS and uncommon in Big 5
and betting that a file containing many characters from that
set is Shift JIS.
@end enumerate

@item
Relationship to decoding semantics

@enumerate
@item
Autodetection should be run on every input stream unless the
user explicitly disables it.

@item
The (conceptual) default procedure is

@item
Read the file into the buffer

Announce the result of autodetection to the user.

User may request decoding, with autodetected encoding(s)
given priority in a list of available encodings.

zations (see (e) below) should avoid introducing data
tion that this default procedure would avoid.

sly, it can't be perfect if any autodecoding is done;
like Hrvoje should have an easily available option to
 to this default (or an optimized approximation which
t actually read the whole file into a buffer) or simply
y everything as binary (with the "font" for binary files
a user option).

@item
This implies that we should be detecting conditions in the
tail of the file which violate the implicit assumptions of the
coding system autodetected (eg, in UTF-8 illegal UTF-8
sequences, including those corresponding to surrogates) should
raise a warning; the buffer should probably be made read-only
and the user prompted.

This could be taken to extremes, like checking by table
whether all characters in a Japanese file are actually
legitimate JIS codes; that's insane (and would cause corporate
encodings to be recognized as binary).  But we should think
about the idea that autodetection shouldn't mean XEmacs can't
change its mind.

@item
A flexible means for the user to delegate the decision
(conditional on the result of autodetection) to decode or not
to XEmacs or a Lisp program should be provided (eg, the
coding priority list and/or a file-coding-alist).

@item
Optimized operations (eg, the current lstreams) should be
provided, with the recognition that if they depend on sampling
the file they are risky.

@item
Mule should provide a reasonable set of default delegations
(as in (d) above) for as many locales as possible.
@end enumerate

@item
Implementation

@enumerate
@item
I think all the decision logic suggested above can be
accomplished through a coding-priority-list and appropriate
initializations for different language environments, and a
file-coding-alist.

@item
Many of the tests on the file's tail shouldn't be very
expensive; in particular, all of the ones I've suggested are
O(n) although they might involve moderate-sized auxiliary
tables for efficiency (eg, 64kB for a single Unicode-oriented
test).
@end enumerate
@end enumerate

Other comments:

It might be reasonable given Hrvoje's objections to require that any
autodetection that could cause data loss (any coding system that
involves escape sequences, and only those AFAIK: by design translation
to Unicode is invertible) by default prompt the user (presumable with
a novice-like ability to retain the prompt, always default to binary,
or always default to the autodetected encoding) in the future, at
least in locales that don't need it (POSIX, Latin-any).

Ben thinks that we can remember the input data; I think it's going to
be hard to comprehensively test that a highly optimized version works.
Good design will help, but ISO-2022 is enormously complex, and there
are many encodings that violate even its lax assumptions.  On the
other hand, memory is the only way to get non-rewindable streams right.

Hrvoje himself said he would like to have an XEmacs that distinguishes
between Latin-1 and Latin-2 text.  Where it is possible to do that,
this is exactly what autodetection of ISO-2022 and Unicode gives you.
Many people would want that, even at some risk of binary corruption.

    >> Once again I remind you that XEmacs is a @strong{text} editor.  There
    >> are lots of files that potentially may have Japanese etc. in
    >> them without this marked, e.g. C or Elisp files in the XEmacs
    >> source.  Surely you're not arguing that we interpret even these
    >> files as binary by default?

    Hrvoje> I am.  If I want to see Japanese, I'll setup my
    Hrvoje> environment that way.  But I don't, and neither do 99% of
    Hrvoje> Croatian users.  I can't speak for French, Italian, and
    Hrvoje> others, but I'd assume similar.

    Hrvoje> If there is Japanese in the source files, I will see it as
    Hrvoje> escape sequences, which is perfectly fine, because I don't
    Hrvoje> read Japanese.

And some (European) people will have their terminals scrambled,
because Shift-JIS contains sequences that can change the state of
XTerm (as do fixed-width Unicode and Big5).  This may also be a
problem with some Windows-12xx encodings; I'm not sure they all are
ISO-2022-clean.  (This isn't a problem for XEmacs native X11 frames or
native MS-Windows frames, and the XEmacs sources themselves are all in
7-bit ISO-2022 now IIRC.  But it is a potential source of great
frustration for many users.)

I think that should be considered too, although it is presumably lower
priority than the data corruption of binary files.

@subheading Response to RFC: Autodetection

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

Date: 11/1/1999 7:24 AM

Stephen, thank you very much for writing this up.  I think it is a good start,
and definitely moving in the direction I would like to see things going: more
proposals, less arguing. (aka "more light, less heat") However, I have some
suggestions for cleaning this up:

You should try to make it more layered.  For example, you might have one
section devoted to the workings of autodetection, which starts out like this
(the section numbers below are totally arbitrary):

@subsubheading Section 5

@code{Autodetect()} is a function whose arguments are (1) a readable stream, (2) some
hints indicating how the autodetection is to proceed, and (3) a value
indicating the maximum number of characters to examine at the beginning of the
stream.  (Possibly, the value in (3) may be some special symbol indicating
that we only go as far as the next line, or a certain number of lines ahead;
this would be used as part of "continuous autodetection", e.g. we are decoding
the results of an interactive terminal session, where the user may
periodically switch encodings, line terminations, etc. as different programs
get run and/or telnet or similar sessions are entered into and exited.) We
assume the stream is rewindable; if not, insert a "rewinding" stream in front
of the non-rewinding stream; this kind of stream automatically buffers the
data as necessary.
[You can use pseudo-code terminology here.  No need for straight C or ELisp.]
[Then proceed to describe what the hints look like -- e.g. you could portray
it as a property list or whatever.  The idea is that, for each locale, there
is a corresponding hints value that is used at least by default.  The hints
structure also has to be set up to allow for two or more competing hints
specifications to be merged together.  For example, the extension of a file
might provide an additional hint or hints about how to interpret the data of
that file, and the caller of @code{autodetect()}, when calling @code{autodetect()} on such a
file, would need to have a way of gracefully merging the default hints
corresponding to the locale with the more specific hints provided by the
extension.  Furthermore, users like Hrvoje might well want to provide their
own hints to supplement and override parts of the generic hints -- e.g. "I
don't ever want to see non-European encodings decoded; treat them as binary
instead".]
[Then describe algorithmically how the autodetection works.  First, you could
describe it more generally, i.e. presenting an algorithmic overview, then you
could discuss in detail exactly how autodetection of a particular type of
external encoding works -- e.g. "for iso2022, we first look for an escape
character, followed by a byte in this range [. ... .] etc."]

@subsubheading Section 6

This section describes the concept of a locale in XEmacs, and how it is
derived from the user's environment.  A locale in XEmacs is a pair, a country
and a language, together determining the handling of locale-specific areas of
XEmacs.  All locale-specific areas in XEmacs make use of this XEmacs locale,
and do not attempt to derive the locale from any other sources.  The user is
free to change the current locale at any time; accessor and mutator functions
are provided to do this so that various locale-specific areas can optionally
be changed together with it.

[Then you describe how the XEmacs locale is extracted from .emacs, from
@code{setlocale()}, from the LANG environment variables, from -font, or wherever
else.  All other sections assume this dirty work is done and never even
mention it]

@subsubheading Section 7

[Here you describe the default @code{autodetect()} hints value corresponding to each
possible locale.  You should probably use a schematic description here, e.g.
an actual Lisp property list, liberally commented.]

@subsubheading Section 8 etc.

[Other sections cover anything I've missed.  By being very careful to separate
out the layers, you simultaneously introduce more rigor (easier to catch bugs)
and make it easier for someone else to understand it completely.]

@subheading Better Algorithm, More Flexibility, Different Levels of Certainty

@subheading Much More Flexible Coding System Priority List, per-Language Environment

@subheading User Ability to Select Encoding when System Unsure or Encounters Errors

@subheading Another Autodetection Proposal

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

however, in general the detection code has major problems and needs lots
of work:

@itemize @bullet
@item
instead of merely "yes" or "no" for particular categories, we need a
more flexible system, with various levels of likelihood.  Currently
I've created a system with six levels, as follows:

[see @file{file-coding.h}]

Let's consider what this might mean for an ASCII text detector.  (In
order to have accurate detection, especially given the iteration I
proposed below, we need active detectors for @strong{all} types of data we
might reasonably encounter, such as ASCII text files, binary files,
and possibly other sorts of ASCII files, and not assume that simply
"falling back to no detection" will work at all well.)

An ASCII text detector DOES NOT report ASCII text as level 0, since
that's what the detector is looking for.  Such a detector ideally
wants all bytes in the range 0x20 - 0x7E (no high bytes!), except for
whitespace control chars and perhaps a few others; LF, CR, or CRLF
sequences at regular intervals (where "regular" might mean an average
< 100 chars and 99% < 300 for code and other stuff of the "text file
w/line breaks" variety, but for the "text file w/o line breaks"
variety, excluding blank lines, averages could easily be 600 or more
with 2000-3000 char "lines" not so uncommon); similar statistical
variance between odds and evens (not Unicode); frequent occurrences of
the space character; letters more common than non-letters; etc.  Also
checking for too little variability between frequencies of characters
and for exclusion of particular characters based on character ranges
can catch ASCII encodings like base-64, UUEncode, UTF-7, etc.
Granted, this doesn't even apply to everything called "ASCII", and we
could potentially distinguish off ASCII for code, ASCII for text,
etc. as separate categories.  However, it does give us a lot to work
off of, in deciding what likelihood to choose -- and it shows there's
in fact a lot of detectable patterns to look for even in something
seemingly so generic as ASCII.  The detector would report most text
files in level 1 or level 2.  EUC encodings, Shift-JIS, etc.  probably
go to level -1 because they also pass the EOL test and all other tests
for the ASCII part of the text, but have lots of high bytes, which in
essence turn them into binary.  Aberrant text files like something in
BASE64 encoding might get placed in level 0, because they pass most
tests but fail dramatically the frequency test; but they should not be
reported as any lower, because that would cause explicit prompting,
and the user should be able any valid text file without prompting.
The escape sequences and the base-64-type checks might send 7-bit
iso2022 to 0, but probably not -1, for similar reasons.

@item
The assumed algorithm for the above detection levels is to in essence
sort categories first by detection level and then by priority.
Perhaps, however, we would want smarter algorithms, or at least
something user-controllable -- in particular, when (other than no
category at level 0 or greater) do we prompt the user to pick a
category?

@item
Improvements in how the detection algorithm works: we want to handle
lots of different ways something could be encoded, including multiple
stacked encodings.  trying to specify a series of detection levels
(check for base64 first, then check for gzip, then check for an i18n
decoding, then for crlf) won't generally work.  for example, what
about the same encoding appearing more than once? for example, take
euc-jp, base64'd, then gzip'd, then base64'd again: this could well
happen, and you could specify the encodings specifically as
base64|gzip|base64|euc-jp, but we'd like to autodetect it without
worrying about exactly what order these things appear in.  we should
allow for iterating over detection/decoding cycles until we reach
some maximum (we got stuck in a loop, due to incorrect category
tables or detection algorithms), have no reported detection levels
over -1, or we end up with no change after a decoding pass (i.e. the
coding system associated with a chosen category was @code{no-conversion}
or something equivalent).  it might make sense to divide things into
two phases (internal and external), where the internal phase has a
separate category list and would probably mostly end up handling EOL
detection; but the i think about it, the more i disagree.  with
properly written detectors, and properly organized tables (in
general, those decodings that are more "distinctive" and thus
detectable with greater certainty go lower on the list), we shouldn't
need two phases.  for example, let's say the example above was also
in CRLF format.  The EOL detector (which really detects *plain text*
with a particular EOL type) would return at most level 0 for all
results until the text file is reached, whereas the base64, gzip or
euc-jp decoders will return higher.  Once the text file is reached,
the EOL detector will return 0 or higher for the CRLF encoding, and
all other detectors will return 0 or lower; thus, we will successfully
proceed through CRLF decoding, or at worst prompt the user. (The only
external-vs-internal distinction that might make sense here is to
favor coding systems of the correct source type over those that
require conversion between external and internal; if done right, this
could allow the CRLF detector to return level 1 for all CRLF-encoded
text files, even those that look like Base-64 or similar encoding, so
that CRLF encoding will always get decoded without prompting, but not
interfere with other decoders.  On the other hand, this
external-vs-internal distinction may not matter at all -- with
automatic internal-external conversion, CRLF decoding can occur
before or after decoding of euc-jp, base64, iso2022, or similar,
without any difference in the final results.)

#### What are we trying to say?  In base64, the CRLF decoding before
base64 decoding is irrelevant, they will be thrown out as whitespace
is not significant in base64.

[sjt considers all of this to be rather bogus.  Ideas like "greater
certainty" and "distinctive" can and should be quantified.  The issue
of proper table organization should be a question of optimization.]

[sjt wonders if it might not be a good idea to use Unicode's newline
character as the internal representation so that (for non-Unicode
coding systems) we can catch EOL bugs on Unix too.]

@item
There need to be two priority lists and two
category->coding-system lists.  Once is general, the other
category->langenv-specific.  The user sets the former, the langenv
category->the latter.  The langenv-specific entries take precedence
category->over the others.  This works similarly to the
category->category->Unicode charset priority list.

@item
The simple list of coding categories per detectors is not enough.
Instead of coding categories, we need parameters.  For example,
Unicode might have separate detectors for UTF-8, UTF-7, UTF-16,
and perhaps UCS-4; or UTF-16/UCS-4 would be one detection type.
UTF-16 would have parameters such as "little-endian" and "needs BOM",
and possibly another one like "collapse/expand/leave alone composite
sequences" once we add this support.  Usually these parameters
correspond directly to a coding system parameter.  Different
likelihood values can be specified for each parameter as well as for
the detection type as a whole.  The user can specify particular
coding systems for a particular combination of detection type and
parameters, or can give "default parameters" associated with a
detection type.  In the latter case, we create a new coding system as
necessary that corresponds to the detected type and parameters.

@item
a better means of presentation.  rather than just coming up
with the new file decoded according to the detected coding
system, allow the user to browse through the file and
conveniently reject it if it looks wrong; then detection
starts again, but with that possibility removed.  in cases where
certainty is low and thus more than one possibility is presented,
the user can browse each one and select one or reject them all.

@item
fail-safe: even after the user has made a choice, if they
later on realize they have the wrong coding system, they can
go back, and we've squirreled away the original data so they
can start the process over.  this may be tricky.

@item
using a larger buffer for detection.  we use just a small
piece, which can give quite random results.  we may need to
buffer up all the data we look through because we can't
necessarily rewind.  the idea is we proceed until we get a
result that's at least at a certain level of certainty
(e.g. "probable") or we reached a maximum limit of how much
we want to buffer.

@item
dealing with interactive systems.  we might need to go ahead
and present the data before we've finished detection, and
then re-decode it, perhaps multiple times, as we get better
detection results.

@item
Clearly some of these are more important than others.  at the
very least, the "better means of presentation" should be
implemented as soon as possible, along with a very simple means
of fail-safe whenever the data is readibly available, e.g. it's
coming from a file, which is the most common scenario.
@end itemize

ben [at least that's what sjt thinks]

*****

Author: @uref{mailto:stephen@@xemacs.org,Stephen Turnbull}

While this is clearly something of an improvement over earlier designs,
it doesn't deal with the most important issue: to do better than categories
(which in the medium term is mostly going to mean "which flavor of Unicode
is this?"), we need to look at statistical behavior rather than ruling out
categories via presence of specific sequences.  This means the stream
processor should

@enumerate
@item
keep octet distributions (octet, 2-, 3-, 4- octet sequences)
@item
in some kind of compressed form
@item
look for "skip features" (eg, characteristic behavior of leading
bytes for UTF-7, UTF-8, UTF-16, Mule code)
@item
pick up certain "simple" regexps
@item
provide "triggers" to determine when statistical detectors should be
invoked, such as octet count
@item
and "magic" like Unicode signatures or file(1) magic.
@end enumerate

--sjt

@node Future Work -- Conversion Error Detection, Future Work -- Unicode, Future Work -- Autodetection, Future Work -- Byte Code Snippets
@subsection Future Work -- Conversion Error Detection
@cindex future work, conversion error detection
@cindex conversion error detection, future work

@subheading "No Corruption" Scheme for Preserving External Encoding when Non-Invertible Transformation Applied

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

A preliminary and simple implementation is:

@quotation
But you could implement it much more simply and usefully by just
determining, for any text being decoded into mule-internal, can we go
back and read the source again?  If not, remember the entire file
(GNUS message, etc) in text properties.  Then, implement the UI
interface (like Netscape's) on top of that.  This way, you have
something that at least works, but it might be inefficient.  All we
would need to do is work on making the underlying implementation more
efficient.
@end quotation

A more detailed proposal for avoiding binary file corruption is

@quotation
Basic idea: A coding system is a filter converting an entire input
stream into an output stream. The resulting stream can be said to be
"correspondent to" the input stream. Similarly, smaller units can
correspond. These could potentially include zero width intervals on
either side, but we avoid this.  Specifically, the coding system works
like:

@example
loop (input) @{

 Read bytes till we have enough to generate a translated character or a chars.

 This establishes a "correspondence" between the whole input and
 output more or less in minimal chunks.

@}
@end example

We then do the following processing:

@enumerate
@item
Eliminate correspondences where one or the other of the I/O streams
has a zero interval by combining with an adjacent interval;

@item
Group together all adjacent "identity" correspondences into as
large groups as possible;

@item
Use text properties to store the non-identity correspondences on
the characters. For identity correspondences, use a simple text
property on all that contains no data but just indicates that the
whole string of text is identity corresponded. (How do we define
"identity"? Latin 1 or could it be something else? For example,
Latin 2)?

@item
Figure out the procedures when text is inserted/deleted and copied
or pasted.

@item
Figure out to save the file out making use of the
correspondences. Allow ways of saving without correspondences, and
doing a "save to buffer with and without correspondences."  Need to
be clever when dealing with modal coding systems to parse the
correspondences to get the internal state right.
@end enumerate
@end quotation

@subheading Another Error-Catching Idea

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

Nov 4, 1999

Finally, I don't think "save the input" is as hard as you make it out to
be.  Conceptually, in fact, it's simple: for each minimal group of bytes
where you cannot absolutely guarantee that an external->internal
transformation is reversible, you put a text property on the
corresponding internal character indicating the bytes that generated
this character.  We also put a text property on every character,
indicating the coding system that caused the transformation.  This
latter text property is extremely efficient (e.g. in a buffer with no
data pasted from elsewhere, it will map to a single extent over all the
buffer), and the former cases should not be prevalent enough to cause a
lot of inefficiency, esp. if we define what "reversible" means for each
coding system in such a way that it correctly handles the most common
cases.  The hardest part, in fact, is making all the string/text
handling in XEmacs be robust w.r.t. text properties.

@subheading Strategies for Error Annotation and Coding Orthogonalization

Author: @uref{mailto:stephen@@xemacs.org,Stephen Turnbull}

We really want to separate out a number of things.  Conceptually,
there is a nested syntax.

At the top level is the ISO 2022 extension syntax, including charset
designation and invocation, and certain auxiliary controls such as the
ISO 6429 direction specification.  These are octet-oriented, with the
single exception (AFAIK) of the "exit Unicode" sequence which uses the
UTF's natural width (1 byte for UTF-7 and UTF-8, 2 bytes for UCS-2 and
UTF-16, and 4 bytes for UCS-4 and UTF-32).  This will be treated as a
(deprecated) special case in Unicode processing.

The middle layer is ISO 2022 character interpretation.  This will depend
on the current state of the ISO 2022 registers, and assembles octets
into the character's internal representation.

The lowest level is translating system control conventions.  At present
this is restricted to newline translation, but one could imagine doing
tab conversion or line wrapping here.  "Escape from Unicode" processing
would be done at this level.

At each level the parser will verify the syntax.  In the case of a
syntax error or warning (such as a redundant escape sequence that affects
no characters), the parser will take some action, typically inserting the
erroneous octets directly into the output and creating an annotation
which can be used by higher level I/O to mark the affected region.

This should make it possible to do something sensible about separating
newline convention processing from character construction, and about
preventing ISO 2022 escape sequences from being recognized
inappropriately.

The basic strategy will be to have octet classification tables, and
switch processing according to the table entry.

It's possible that, by doing the processing with tables of functions or
the like, the parser can be used for both detection and translation.

@subheading Handling Writing a File Safely, Without Data Loss

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@quotation
When writing a file, we need error detection; otherwise somebody
will create a Unicode file without realizing the coding system
of the buffer is Raw, and then lose all the non-ASCII/Latin-1
text when it's written out.  We need two levels

@enumerate
@item
first, a "safe-charset" level that checks before any actual
encoding to see if all characters in the document can safely
be represented using the given coding system.  FSF has a
"safe-charset" property of coding systems, but it's stupid
because this information can be automatically derived from
the coding system, at least the vast majority of the time.
What we need is some sort of
alternative-coding-system-precedence-list, langenv-specific,
where everything on it can be checked for safe charsets and
then the user given a list of possibilities.  When the user
does "save with specified encoding", they should see the same
precedence list.  Again like with other precedence lists,
there's also a global one, and presumably all coding systems
not on other list get appended to the end (and perhaps not
checked at all when doing safe-checking?).  safe-checking
should work something like this: compile a list of all
charsets used in the buffer, along with a count of chars
used.  that way, "slightly unsafe" coding systems can perhaps
be presented at the end, which will lose only a few characters
and are perhaps what the users were looking for.

[sjt sez this whole step is a crock.  If a universal coding system
is unacceptable, the user had better know what he/she is doing,
and explicitly specify a lossy encoding.
In principle, we can simply check for characters being writable as
we go along.  Eg, via an "unrepresentable character handler."  We
still have the buffer contents.  If we can't successfully save,
then ask the user what to do.  (Do we ever simply destroy previous
file version before completing a write?)]

@item
when actually writing out, we need error checking in case an
individual char in a charset can't be written even though the
charsets are safe.  again, the user gets the choice of other
reasonable coding systems.

[sjt -- something is very confused, here; safe charsets should be
defined as those charsets all of whose characters can be encoded.]

@item
same thing (error checking, list of alternatives, etc.) needs
to happen when reading!  all of this will be a lot of work!
@end enumerate
@end quotation

Author: @uref{mailto:stephen@@xemacs.org,Stephen Turnbull}

I don't much like Ben's scheme.  First, this isn't an issue of I/O,
it's a coding issue.  It can happen in many places, not just on stream
I/O.  Error checking should take place on all translations.  Second,
the two-pass algorithm should be avoided if possible.  In some cases
(eg, output to a tty) we won't be able to go back and change the
previously output data.  Third, the whole idea of having a buffer full
of arbitrary characters which we're going to somehow shoehorn into a
file based on some twit user's less than informed idea of a coding system
is kind of laughable from the start.  If we're going to say that a buffer
has a coding system, shouldn't we enforce restrictions on what you can
put into it?  Fourth, what's the point of having safe charsets if some
of the characters in them are unsafe?  Fifth, what makes you think we're
going to have a list of charsets?  It seems to me that there might be
reasons to have user-defined charsets (eg, "German" vs "French" subsets
of ISO 8859/15).  Sixth, the idea of having language environment determine
precedence doesn't seem very useful to me.  Users who are working with a
language that corresponds to the language environment are not going to
run into safe charsets problems.  It's users who are outside of their
usual language environment who run into trouble.  Also, the reason for
specifying anything other than a universal coding system is normally
restrictions imposed by other users or applications.  Seventh, the
statistical feedback isn't terribly useful.  Users rarely "want" a
coding system, they want their file saved in a useful way.  We could
add a FORCE argument to conversions for those who really want a specific
coding system.  But mostly, a user might want to edit out a few unsafe
characters.  So (up to some maximum) we should keep a list of unsafe
text positions, and provide a convenient function for traversing them.

--sjt

@node Future Work -- Unicode, Future Work -- BIDI Support, Future Work -- Conversion Error Detection, Future Work -- Byte Code Snippets
@subsection Future Work -- Unicode
@cindex future work, unicode
@cindex unicode, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

Following is an old proposal.  Unicode has been implemented already, in
a different fashion; but there are some ideas here for more general
support, e.g. properties of Unicode characters other than their mappings
to particular charsets.


We recognize 128, [256], 128x128, [256x256] for source charsets;

for Unicode, 256x256 or 16x256x256.

In all cases, use tables of tables and substitute a default subtable
if entire row is empty.

If destination is Unicode, either 16 or 32 bits.

If destination is charset, either 8 or 16 bits.

For the moment, since we only do 94, 96, 94x94 or 96x96, only do 128
or 128x128 for source charsets and use the range 33-126 or 32-127.
(Except ASCII - we special case that and have no table because we can
algorithmically translate)

Also have a 16x256x256 table -> 32 bits of Unicode char properties.

A particular charset contains two associated mapping tables, for both
directions.

API is set-unicode-mapping:

@example
(set-unicode-mapping
     unicode char
     unicode charset-code charset-offset
     unicode vector of char
     unicode list of char
     unicode string of char
     unicode vector or list of codes charset-offset
@end example

  Establishes a mapping between a unicode codepoint (an integer) and
  one or more chars in a charset.  The mapping is automatically
  established in both directions.  Chars in a charset can be specified
  either with an actual character or a codepoint (i.e. an integer)
  and the charset it's within.  If a sequence of chars or charset
  points is given, multiple mappings are established for consecutive
  unicode codepoints starting with the given one.  Charset codepoints
  are specified as most-significant x 256 + least significant, with
  both bytes in the range 33-126 (for 94 or 94x94) or 32-127 (for 96
  or 96x96), unless an offset is given, which will be subtracted from
  each byte.  (Most common values are 128, for codepoints given with
  the high bit set, or -32, for codepoints given as 1-94 or 0-95.)

Other APIs:

@example
(write-unicode-mapping file charset)
@end example

  Write the mapping table for a particular charset to the specified
  file.  The tables are written in an internal format that allows for
  efficient loading, for portability across platforms and XEmacs
  invocations, for conserving space, for appending multiple tables one
  directly after another with no need for a directory anywhere in the
  file, and for reorganizing a file as in this format (with a magic
  sequence at the beginning).  The data will be appended at the end of
  a file, so that multiple tables can be written to a file; remove the
  file first to avoid this.

@example
(write-unicode-properties file unicode-codepoint length)
@end example

  Write the Unicode properties (not including charset mappings) for
  the specified range of contiguous Unicode codepoints to the end of
  the file (i.e. append mode) in a binary format similar to what was
  mentioned in the write-unicode-mapping description and with the same
  features.

Extension to set-unicode-mapping:

@example
(set-unicode-mapping
  list-or-vector-of-unicode-codepoints char
  ""                                   charset-code charset-offset
  ""                                   sequence of char
  ""                                   list-or-vector-of-codes
charset-offset
@end example

  The first two forms are conceptually the inverse of the forms above
  to specify characters for a contiguous range of Unicode codepoints.
  These new forms let you specify the Unicode codepoints for a
  contiguous range of chars in a charset.  "Contiguous" here means
  that if we run off the end of a row, we go to the first entry of the
  next row, rather than to an invalid code point.  For example, in a
  94x94 charset, valid rows and columns are in the range 0x21-0x7e;
  after 0x457c 0x457d 4x457e goes 0x4621, not something like 0x457f,
  which is invalid.

  The final two forms are the most general, letting you specify an
  arbitrary set of both Unicode points and charset chars, and the two
  are matched up just like a series of individual calls.  However, if
  the lists or vectors do not have the same length, an error is
  signaled.

@example
(load-unicode-mapping file &optional charset)
@end example

  If charset is omitted, loads all charset mapping tables found and
  returns a list of the charsets found.  If charset is specified,
  searches through the file for the appropriate mapping tables.  (This
  is extremely fast because each entry in the file gives an offset to
  the next one).  Returns t if found.

@example
(load-unicode-properties file unicode-codepoint)
@end example

@example
(list-unicode-entries file)
@end example

@example
(autoload-unicode-mapping charset)
@end example

...

(unfinished)

@node Future Work -- BIDI Support, Future Work -- Localized Text/Messages, Future Work -- Unicode, Future Work -- Byte Code Snippets
@subsection Future Work -- BIDI Support
@cindex future work, bidi support
@cindex bidi support, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@enumerate
@item
Use text properties to handle nesting levels, overrides
BIDI-specific text properties (as per Unicode BIDI algorithm)
computed at text insertion time.

@item
Lisp API for reordering a display line at redisplay time,
possibly substitution of different glyphs (esp. mirroring of
glyphs).

@item
Lisp API called after a display line is laid out, but only when
reordering may be necessary (display engine checks for
non-uniform BIDI text properties; can handle internally a line
that's completely in one direction)

@item
Default direction is a buffer-local variable

@item
We concentrate on implementing Unicode BIDI algorithm.

@item
Display support for mirroring of entire window

@item
Display code keeps track of mirroring junctures so it can
display double cursor.

@item
Entire layout of screen (on a per window basis) is exported as a
Lisp API, for visual editing (also very useful for other
purposes e.g. proper handling of word wrapping with proportional
fonts, complex Lisp layout engines e.g. W3)

@item
Logical, visual, etc. cursor movement handled entirely in Lisp,
using aforementioned API, plus a specifier for controlling how
cursor is shown (e.g. split or not).
@end enumerate

@node Future Work -- Localized Text/Messages,  , Future Work -- BIDI Support, Future Work -- Byte Code Snippets
@subsection Future Work -- Localized Text/Messages
@cindex future work, localized text/messages
@cindex localized text/messages, future work

NOTE: There is existing message translation in X Windows of menu names.
This is handled through X resources.  The files are in
@file{PACKAGES/mule-packages/locale/app-defaults/LOCALE/Emacs}, where
@var{locale} is @samp{ja}, @samp{fr}, etc.

See lib-src/make-msgfile.lex.

Long comment from jwz, some additions from ben marked "ben":

(much of this comment is outdated, and a lot of it is actually
implemented)

@subsection Proposal for How This All Ought to Work

Author: @uref{mailto:jwz@@jwz.org,Jamie Zawinski}

this isn't implemented yet, but this is the plan-in-progress

In general, it's accepted that the best way to internationalize is for all
messages to be referred to by a symbolic name (or number) and come out of a
table or tables, which are easy to change.

However, with Emacs, we've got the task of internationalizing a huge body
of existing code, which already contains messages internally.

For the C code we've got two options:

@itemize @bullet
@item
Use a Sun-like @code{gettext()} form, which takes an "english" string which
appears literally in the source, and uses that as a hash key to find
a translated string;
@item
Rip all of the strings out and put them in a table.
@end itemize

In this case, it's desirable to make as few changes as possible to the C
code, to make it easier to merge the code with the FSF version of emacs
which won't ever have these changes made to it.  So we should go with the
former option.

The way it has been done (between 19.8 and 19.9) was to use @code{gettext()}, but
@strong{also} to make massive changes to the source code.  The goal now is to use
@code{gettext()} at run-time and yet not require a textual change to every line
in the C code which contains a string constant.  A possible way to do this
is described below.

(@code{gettext()} can be implemented in terms of @code{catgets()} for non-Sun systems, so
that in itself isn't a problem.)

For the Lisp code, we've got basically the same options: put everything in
a table, or translate things implicitly.

Another kink that lisp code introduces is that there are thousands of third-
party packages, so changing the source for all of those is simply not an
option.

Is it a goal that if some third party package displays a message which is
one we know how to translate, then we translate it?  I think this is a
worthy goal.  It remains to be seen how well it will work in practice.

So, we should endeavor to minimize the impact on the lisp code.  Certain
primitive lisp routines (the stuff in lisp/prim/, and especially in
@file{cmdloop.el} and @file{minibuf.el}) may need to be changed to know about translation,
but that's an ideologically clean thing to do because those are considered
a part of the emacs substrate.

However, if we find ourselves wanting to make changes to, say, RMAIL, then
something has gone wrong.  (Except to do things like remove assumptions
about the order of words within a sentence, or how pluralization works.)

There are two parts to the task of displaying translated strings to the 
user: the first is to extract the strings which need to be translated from
the sources; and the second is to make some call which will translate those
strings before they are presented to the user.

The old way was to use the same form to do both, that is, @code{GETTEXT()} was both
the tag that we searched for to build a catalog, and was the form which did
the translation.  The new plan is to separate these two things more: the
tags that we search for to build the catalog will be stuff that was in there
already, and the translation will get done in some more centralized, lower
level place.

This program (@file{make-msgfile.c}) addresses the first part, extracting the 
strings.

For the emacs C code, we need to recognize the following patterns:

@example
  message ("string" ... )
  error ("string")
  report_file_error ("string" ... )
  signal_simple_error ("string" ... )
  signal_simple_error_2 ("string" ... )
  
  build_translated_string ("string")
  #### add this and use it instead of @code{build_string()} in some places.
  
  yes_or_no_p ("string" ... )
  #### add this instead of funcalling Qyes_or_no_p directly.

  barf_or_query_if_file_exists	#### restructure this
  check all callers of Fsignal	#### restructure these
  signal_error (Qerror ... )		#### change all of these to @code{error()}
  
  And we also parse out the @code{interactive} prompts from @code{DEFUN()} forms.
  
  #### When we've got a string which is a candidate for translation, we
  should ignore it if it contains only format directives, that is, if
  there are no alphabetic characters in it that are not a part of a `%'
  directive.  (Careful not to translate either "%s%s" or "%s: ".)
@end example

For the emacs Lisp code, we need to recognize the following patterns:

@example
  (message "string" ... )
  (error "string" ... )
  (format "string" ... )
  (read-from-minibuffer "string" ... )
  (read-shell-command "string" ... )
  (y-or-n-p "string" ... )
  (yes-or-no-p "string" ... )
  (read-file-name "string" ... )
  (temp-minibuffer-message "string")
  (query-replace-read-args "string" ... )
@end example
  
I expect there will be a lot like the above; basically, any function which
is a commonly used wrapper around an eventual call to @code{message} or
@code{read-from-minibuffer} needs to be recognized by this program.

@example
  (dgettext "domain-name" "string")		#### do we still need this?
  
  things that should probably be restructured:
    @code{princ} in @file{cmdloop.el}
    @code{insert} in @file{debug.el}
    face-interactive
    @file{help.el}, @file{syntax.el} all messed up
@end example
  
Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

ben: (format) is a tricky case.  If I use format to create a string
that I then send to a file, I probably don't want the string translated.
On the other hand, If the string gets used as an argument to (y-or-n-p)
or some such function, I do want it translated, and it needs to be
translated before the %s and such are replaced.  The proper solution
here is for (format) and other functions that call gettext but don't
immediately output the string to the user to add the translated (and
formatted) string as a string property of the object, and have
functions that output potentially translated strings look for a
"translated string" property.  Of course, this will fail if someone
does something like

@example
   (y-or-n-p (concat (if you-p "Do you " "Does he ")
     		(format "want to delete %s? " filename))))
@end example

But you shouldn't be doing things like this anyway.

ben: Also, to avoid excessive translating, strings should be marked
as translated once they get translated, and further calls to gettext
don't do any more translating.  Otherwise, a call like

@example
   (y-or-n-p (format "Delete %s? " filename))
@end example

would cause translation on both the pre-formatted and post-formatted
strings, which could lead to weird results in some cases (y-or-n-p
has to translate its argument because someone could pass a string to
it directly).  Note that the "translating too much" solution outlined
below could be implemented by just marking all strings that don't
come from a .el or .elc file as already translated.

Menu descriptors: one way to extract the strings in menu labels would be
to teach this program about "^(defvar .*menu\n" forms; that's probably
kind of hard, though, so perhaps a better approach would be to make this
program recognize lines of the form

@example
  "string" ... ;###translate
@end example

where the magic token ";###translate" on a line means that the string 
constant on this line should go into the message catalog.  This is analogous
to the magic ";###autoload" comments, and to the magic comments used in the
EPSF structuring conventions.

-----
So this program manages to build up a catalog of strings to be translated.
To address the second part of the problem, of actually looking up the
translations, there are hooks in a small number of low level places in
emacs.

Assume the existence of a C function gettext(str) which returns the 
translation of @var{str} if there is one, otherwise returns @var{str}.

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{message()} takes a char* as its argument, and always filters it through
@code{gettext()} before displaying it.

@item
errors are printed by running the lisp function @code{display-error} which
doesn't call @code{message} directly (it princ's to streams), so it must be
carefully coded to translate its arguments.  This is only a few lines
of code.

@item
@code{Fread_minibuffer_internal()} is the lowest level interface to all minibuf
interactions, so it is responsible for translating the value that will go
into Vminibuf_prompt.

@item
Fpopup_menu filters the menu titles through @code{gettext()}.

The above take care of 99% of all messages the user ever sees.

@item
The lisp function temp-minibuffer-message translates its arg.

@item
query-replace-read-args is funny; it does
  (setq from (read-from-minibuffer (format "%s: " string) ... ))
  (setq to (read-from-minibuffer (format "%s %s with: " string from) ... ))
@end itemize

What should we do about this?  We could hack query-replace-read-args to
translate its args, but might this be a more general problem?  I don't
think we ought to translate all calls to format.  We could just change
the calling sequence, since this is odd in that the first %s wants to be
translated but the second doesn't.

Solving the "translating too much" problem:

The concern has been raised that in this situation:

@itemize @bullet
@item
"Help" is a string for which we know a translation;
@item
someone visits a file called Help, and someone does something 
contrived like (error buffer-file-name)
@end itemize

then we would display the translation of Help, which would not be correct.
We can solve this by adding a bit to Lisp_String objects which identifies
them as having been read as literal constants from a .el or .elc file (as
opposed to having been constructed at run time as it would in the above 
case.)  To solve this:

@itemize @bullet
@item
@code{Fmessage()} takes a lisp string as its first argument.
If that string is a constant, that is, was read from a source file
as a literal, then it calls @code{message()} with it, which translates.
Otherwise, it calls @code{message_no_translate()}, which does not translate.

@item
@code{Ferror()} (actually, @code{Fsignal()} when condition is Qerror) works similarly.
@end itemize

More specifically, we do:

@quotation
 Scan specified C and Lisp files, extracting the following messages:

@example
   C files:
      GETTEXT (...)
      DEFER_GETTEXT (...)
      DEFUN interactive prompts
   Lisp files:
      (gettext ...)
      (dgettext "domain-name" ...)
      (defer-gettext ...)
      (interactive ...)
@end example

The arguments given to this program are all the C and Lisp source files
of GNU Emacs.  .el and .c files are allowed.  There is no support for .elc
files at this time, but they may be specified; the corresponding .el file
will be used.  Similarly, .o files can also be specified, and the corresponding
.c file will be used.  This helps the makefile pass the correct list of files.

The results, which go to standard output or to a file specified with -a or -o
(-a to append, -o to start from nothing), are quoted strings wrapped in
gettext(...).  The results can be passed to xgettext to produce a .po message
file.

However, we also need to do the following:

@enumerate
@item
Definition of Arg below won't handle a generalized argument
as might appear in a function call.  This is fine for DEFUN
and friends, because only simple arguments appear there; but
it might run into problems if Arg is used for other sorts
of functions.
@item
@code{snarf()} should be modified so that it doesn't output null
strings and non-textual strings (see the comment at the top
of @file{make-msgfile.c}).
@item
parsing of (insert) should snarf all of the arguments.
@item
need to add set-keymap-prompt and deal with gettext of that.
@item
parsing of arguments should snarf all strings anywhere within
the arguments, rather than just looking for a string as the
argument.  This allows if statements as arguments to get parsed.
@item
@code{begin_paren_counting()} et al. should handle recursive entry.
@item
handle set-window-buffer and other such functions that take
a buffer as the other-than-first argument.
@item
there is a fair amount of work to be done on the C code.
Look through the code for #### comments associated with
'#ifdef I18N3' or with an I18N3 nearby.
@item
Deal with @code{get-buffer-process} et al.
@item
Many of the changes in the Lisp code marked
'rewritten for I18N3 snarfing' should be undone once (5) is
implemented.
@item
Go through the Lisp code in prim and make sure that all
strings are gettexted as necessary.  This may reveal more
things to implement.
@item
Do the equivalent of (8) for the Lisp code.
@item
Deal with parsing of menu specifications.
@end enumerate
@end quotation

@node Future Work -- Lisp Stream API, Future Work -- Multiple Values, Future Work -- Byte Code Snippets, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Lisp Stream API
@cindex future work, Lisp stream API
@cindex Lisp stream API, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

Expose XEmacs internal lstreams to Lisp as stream objects.  (In
addition to the functions given below, each stream object has
properties that can be associated with it using the standard put, get
etc. API.  For GNU Emacs, where put and get have not been extended to
be general property functions, but work only on strings, we would have
to create functions set-stream-property, stream-property,
remove-stream-property, and stream-properties.  These provide the same
functionality as the generic get, put, remprop, and object-plist
functions under XEmacs)

(Implement properties using a hash table, and @strong{generalize} this so
that it is extremely easy to add a property interface onto any kind
of object)

@example  
(write-stream STREAM STRING)
@end example

Write the STRING to the STREAM.  This will signal an error if all the
bytes cannot be written.

@example
(read-stream STREAM &optional N SEQUENCE)
@end example

Reads data from STREAM.  N specifies the number of bytes or
characters, depending on the stream.  SEQUENCE specifies where to
write the data into.  If N is not specified, data is read until end of
file.  If SEQUENCE is not specified, the data is returned as a stream.
If SEQUENCE is specified, the SEQUENCE must be large enough to hold
the data.

@example
(push-stream-marker STREAM)
@end example

   returns ID, probably a stream marker object

@example
(pop-stream-marker STREAM)
@end example

   backs up stream to last marker

@example
(unread-stream STREAM STRING)
@end example

The only valid STREAM is an input stream in which case the data in
STRING is pushed back and will be read ahead of all other data.  In
general, there is no limit to the amount of data that can be unread or
the number of times that unread-stream can be called before another
read.

@example
(stream-available-chars STREAM)
@end example

This returns the number of characters (or bytes) that can definitely
be read from the screen without an error.  This can be useful, for
example, when dealing with non-blocking streams when an attempt to
read too much data will result in a blocking error.

@example
(stream-seekable-p STREAM)
@end example

Returns true if the stream is seekable.  If false, operations such as
seek-stream and stream-position will signal an error.  However, the
functions set-stream-marker and seek-stream-marker will still succeed
for an input stream.

@example
(stream-position STREAM)
@end example

If STREAM is a seekable stream, returns a position which can be passed
to seek-stream.

@example
(seek-stream STREAM N)
@end example

If STREAM is a seekable stream, move to the position indicated by N,
otherwise signal an error.

@example
(set-stream-marker STREAM)
@end example

If STREAM is an input stream, create a marker at the current position,
which can later be moved back to.  The stream does not need to be a
seekable stream.  In this case, all successive data will be buffered
to simulate the effect of a seekable stream.  Therefore use this
function with care.

@example
(seek-stream-marker STREAM marker)
@end example

Move the stream back to the position that was stored in the marker
object. (this is generally an opaque object of type stream-marker).

@example
(delete-stream-marker MARKER)
@end example

Destroy the stream marker and if the stream is a non-seekable stream
and there are no other stream markers pointing to an earlier position,
frees up some buffering information.

@example
(delete-stream STREAM N)
@end example

@example
(delete-stream-marker STREAM ID)
@end example

@example
(close-stream stream)
@end example

Writes any remaining data to the stream and closes it and the object
to which it's attached.  This also happens automatically when the
stream is garbage collected.

@example
(getchar-stream STREAM)
@end example

Return a single character from the stream. (This may be a single byte
depending on the nature of the stream).  This is actually a macro with
an extremely efficient implementation (as efficient as you can get in
Emacs Lisp), so that this can be used without fear in a loop.  The
implementation works by reading a large amount of data into a vector
and then simply using the function AREF to read characters one by one
from the vector.  Because AREF is one of the primitives handled
specially by the byte interpreter, this will be very efficient.  The
actual implementation may in fact use the function
call-with-condition-handler to avoid the necessity of checking for
overflow.  Its typical implementation is to fetch the vector
containing the characters as a stream property, as well as the index
into that vector.  Then it retrieves the character and increments the
value and stores it back in the stream.  As a first implementation, we
check to see when we are reading the character whether the character
would be out of range.  If so, we read another 4096 characters,
storing them into the same vector, setting the index back to the
beginning, and then proceeding with the rest of the getchar algorithm.

@example
(putchar-stream STREAM CHAR)
@end example

This is similar to getchar-stream but it writes data instead of
reading data.

@example
Function make-stream
@end example

There are actually two stream-creation functions, which are:

@example
(make-input-stream TYPE PROPERTIES)
(make-output-stream TYPE PROPERTIES)
@end example

These can be used to create a stream that reads data, or writes data,
respectively.  PROPERTIES is a property list and the allowable
properties in it are defined by the type.  Possible types are:

@enumerate
@item
@code{file} (this reads data from a file or writes to a file)

Allowable properties are:

@table @code
@item :file-name
(the name of the file)

@item :create
(for output streams only, creates the file if it doesn't
already exist)

@item :exclusive
(for output streams only, fails if the file already
exists)

@item :append
(for output streams only; starts appending to the end
of the file rather than overwriting the file)

@item :offset
(positions in bytes in the file where reading or writing
should begin.  If unspecified, defaults to the beginning of the
file or to the end of the file when :appended specified)

@item :count
(for input streams only, the number of bytes to read from
the file before signaling "end of file".  If nil or omitted, the
number of bytes is unlimited)

@item :non-blocking
(if true, reads or writes will fail if the operation
would block.  This only makes sense for non-regular files).
@end table

@item
@code{process} (For output streams only, send data to a process.)

Allowable properties are:

@table @code
@item :process
(the process object)
@end table

@item
@code{buffer}  (Read from or write to a buffer.)

Allowable properties are:

@table @code
@item :buffer
(the name of the buffer or the buffer object.)

@item :start
(the position to start reading from or writing to.  If nil,
use the buffer point.  If true, use the buffer's point and move
point beyond the end of the data read or written.)

@item :end
(only for input streams, the position to stop reading at.  If
nil, continue to the end of the buffer.)

@item :ignore-accessible
(if true, the default for :start and :end
ignore any narrowing of the buffer.)
@end table

@item
@code{stream} (read from or write to a lisp stream)

Allowable properties are:

@table @code
@item :stream
(the stream object)

@item :offset
(the position to begin to be reading from or writing to)

@item :length
(For input streams only, the amount of data to read,
defaulting to the rest of the data in the string.  Revise string
for output streams only if true, the stream is resized as
necessary to accommodate data written off the end, otherwise the
writes will fail.
@end table

@item
@code{memory} (For output only, writes data to an internal memory
buffer.  This is more lightweight than using a Lisp buffer.  The
function memory-stream-string can be used to convert the memory
into a string.)

@item
@code{debugging} (For output streams only, write data to the debugging
output.)

@item
@code{stream-device} (During non-interactive invocations only, Read
from or write to the initial stream terminal device.)

@item
@code{function} (For output streams only, send data by calling a
function, exactly as with the STREAM argument to the print
primitive.)

Allowable Properties are:

@table @code
@item :function
(the function to call.  The function is called with one
argument, the stream.)
@end table

@item
@code{marker} (Write data to the location pointed to by a marker and
move the marker past the data.)

Allowable properties are:

@table @code
@item :marker
(the marker object.)
@end table

@item
@code{decoding} (As an input stream, reads data from another stream and
decodes it according to a coding system.  As an output stream
decodes the data written to it according to a coding system and
then writes results in another stream.)

Properties are:

@table @code
@item :coding-system
(the symbol of coding system object, which defines the
decoding.)

@item :stream
(the stream on the other end.)
@end table

@item
@code{encoding} (As an input stream, reads data from another stream and
encodes it according to a coding system.  As an output stream
encodes the data written to it according to a coding system and
then writes results in another stream.)

Properties are:

@table @code
@item :coding-system
(the symbol of coding system object, which defines the
encoding.)

@item :stream
(the stream on the other end.)
@end table
@end enumerate

Consider

@example
(define-stream-type 'type
  :read-function
  :write-function
  :rewind-
  :seek-
  :tell-
  (?:buffer)
@end example

Old Notes:

Expose lstreams as hash (put get etc. properties) table.

@example  
  (write-stream stream string)
  (read-stream stream &optional n sequence)
  (make-stream ...)
  (push-stream-marker stream)
     returns ID prob a stream marker object
  (pop-stream-marker stream)
     backs up stream to last marker
  (unread-stream stream string)
  (stream-available-chars stream)
  (seek-stream stream n)
  (delete-stream stream n)
  (delete-stream-marker stream ic) can always be poe only nested if you
    have set stream marker
  
  (get-char-stream @strong{generalizes} stream)
  
  a macro that tries to be efficient perhaps by reading the next
  e.g. 512 characters into a vector and arefing them.  Might check aref
  optimization for vectors in the byte interpreter.
  
  (make-stream 'process :process ... :type write)
  
  Consider
  
  (define-stream-type 'type
    :read-function
    :write-function
    :rewind-
    :seek-
    :tell-
    (?:buffer)
@end example
  
@node Future Work -- Multiple Values, Future Work -- Macros, Future Work -- Lisp Stream API, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Multiple Values
@cindex future work, multiple values
@cindex multiple values, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

On low level, all funs that can return multiple values are defined
with DEFUN_MULTIPLE_VALUES and have an extra parameter, a struct
mv_context *.

It has to be this way to ensure that only the fun itself, and no called
funs, think they're called in an mv context.

apply, funcall, eval might propagate their mv context to their
children?

Might need eval-mv to implement calling a fun in an mv context.  Maybe
also funcall_mv? apply_mv?

Generally, just set up context appropriately.  Call fun (noticing
whether it's an mv-aware fun) and binding values on the way back or
passing them out.  (e.g. to multiple-value-bind)

@subheading Common Lisp multiple values, required for specifier improvements.

The multiple return values from get-specifier should allow the
specifier value to be modified in the correct fashion (i.e.  should
interact correctly with all manner of changes from other callers)
using set-specifier.  We should check this and see if we need other
return values.  (how-to-add? inst-list?)

In C, call multiple-values-context to get number of expected values,
and multiple-value-set (#, value) to get values other than the first.

(Returns Qno_value, or something, if there are no values.

#### Or should throw?  Probably not.
#### What happens if a fn returns no values but the caller expects a
#### value?

Something like @code{funcall_with_multiple_values()} for setting up the
context.

For efficiency, byte code could notice Ffuncall to m.v. functions and
sub in special opcodes during load in processing, if it mattered.
  
@node Future Work -- Macros, Future Work -- Specifiers, Future Work -- Multiple Values, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Macros
@cindex future work, macros
@cindex macros, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@enumerate
@item
Option to control whether beep really kills a macro execution.
@item
Recently defined macros are remembered on a stack, so accidentally
defining another one doesn't fuck you up.  You can "rotate"
anonymous macros or just pick one (numbered) to put on tags, so it
works with execute macro - menu shows the anonymous macro, and
lists some keystrokes.  Normally numbered but you can easily assign
to named fun or to keyboard sequence or give it a number (or give
it a letter accelerator?)
@end enumerate

@node Future Work -- Specifiers, Future Work -- Display Tables, Future Work -- Macros, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Specifiers
@cindex future work, specifiers
@cindex specifiers, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@subheading Ideas To Work On When Their Time Has Come

@itemize
@item
specifier-instance returns additional params (multiple-value) - the instantiator
used, the associated tag set, the locale found in, a code that can
be passed in as an additional param RESTART to restart an
instantiation process, e.g. to allow an instantiator to "inherit"
from another one higher up.  Also, domain can be 'global (look only
in global specs) or "complex" - a list of the actual locales to look
in (e.g. a buffer - frame - a device - 'global)

@item
pragmatic-specifier-domain (locale)
Converts a locale into a domain in a way that's "pragmatic" - does
what most users expect will happen, but is not clean.  In
particular, handling of "buffer" requires trickiness, as mentioned
before.

@item
ensure-instantiator-exists (specifier locale)
Ensures an actual instantiator exists in a locale, so that it can
later be futzed with.  If none exists, one is constructed by first
calling pragmatic-specifier domain and then specifier-instance and
fetching out the instantiator for this call.

@item
map-modifying-instantiators (specifier fun &optional locale tag-set)
Same args as map-specifier, but use the return value from the fun to
replace the instantiator.  Called with three args (instantiator
locale tag-set)

@item
map-modifying-instantiators-force (specifier fun &optional locale tag-set)
Same as previous, but calls ensure-instantiator-exists on each
locale before processing.
@end itemize

NOTE:  Can do preliminary implementation without Multiple Values -
instead create fun specifier-instance - that returns a list (and will
be deleted at some point)

@subheading specifier &c changes for glyphs

@enumerate
@item
@itemize @bullet
@item
resizable vectors with funs to insert, delete elements (elements
shift accordingly)
@item
gap array vectors as an implementation of resizing vectors.
@end itemize

@item
You can @code{put} @code{get}, etc. on vectors to modify properties within
them.

@item
copy-over routines
routines that carefully copy one complex item OVER another one,
destroying the second in the process.  I wrote one for lists.  Need
a general copy-over-tree.

@item
improvement to specifier mapping routines e.g.

map-modifying-instantiator and its force versions below, so that we
could implement in turns.

@item
put-specifier-property (specifier which finds the key, value
instantiator in the locale, &opt locale possibly creating one
tag-set) if necessary and goes into the vector, changes it, and
puts it back into the specifier.

@item
Smarter add-spec-to-specifier

If it notices that it's just replacing one instantiator with
another, instead of just copy-tree the first one and throw away the
other, use copy-over-tree to save lots of garbage when repeatedly
called.

ILLEGIBLE: GOTO LOO BUI BUGS LAST PNOTE

@item
When at image instantiate:
@itemize @bullet
@item
Some properties in the instantiators could be implemented through
dynamically modifying an existing image instance (e.g. when the
value of a slider or progress bar or text in a text field
changes).  So when we hash, we only hash the part of the
instantiator that cannot be dynamically modified (We might need
to do something tricky here - allowing a :key property in hash
tables or @strong{ILLEGIBLE}).  Anyway, so we need to generate an image
instance, and we mask off the dynamic properties and look up in
our hash table, and we get something back!  But is it ours to
modify?  (We already checked to see it wasn't exactly the same
dynamic properties that it had)  Thus ---
@end itemize

@item
Reference counting.  Somehow or other, each image instance in the
cache needs to keep track of the instantiators that generated it.
@end enumerate

It might do this through some sort of special instantiator-reference
object.  This points to the instantiator, where in the hierarchy the
instantiator is etc.  When an instantiator gets removed, this
gu*ILLEGIBLE* values report not attached.  Somehow that gets
communicated back to the image instance in the cache.  So somehow or
other, the image instance in the cache knows who's using them and so
when you go and keep updating the slider value, by simply modifying an
instantiator, which efficiently changes the internal structure of this
specifier - eventually image instantiate notices that the image
instance it points has no other user and just modifiers it,  but in
complex situations, some optimizations get lost, but everything is
still correct.

vs.

Andy's set-image-instance-property, which achieves the same
optimizations much more easily, but

@enumerate
@item
falls apart in any more complicated system

@item
only works because of the way the caching system in XEmacs works.
Any change (e.g. @strong{ILLEGIBLE} more of making the caches GQ instead
of GQ) is likely to make things stop working right in all but the
simplest situation.
@end enumerate

@subheading Specifier improvements for support of specifier inheritance (necessary for the new font mapping API)

'Fallback should be a locale/domain.

@example
(get-specifier specifier &optional locale)

#### If locale is omitted, should it be (current-buffer) or 'global?
#### Should argument not be optional?
@end example

If a buffer is specified: find a window showing buffer by looking

@itemize @bullet
@item
at selected window
@item
at other windows on selected frame
@item
at selected windows on other frames in selected device
@item
at other windows on ""
@item
at selected windows on selected frames on other devices in selected
console.
@item
other windows sel from other devices sel con
@item
""       oth       ""           sel
@item
sel win sel from sel dev oth con
@item
oth win sel from sel dev oth con
@item
sel win oth from sel dev oth con
@item
oth win oth from sel dev oth con
@item
sel win sel from oth dev oth con
@item
oth win sel from oth dev oth con
@item
oth win oth from oth dev oth con
@end itemize

If none, use  buffer -> sel from -> etc.

@example
Returns multiple values
  second is instantiator
  third  is locale containing inst.
  fourth is tag set

(restart-specifier-instance ...)
@end example

like specifier-instance, but allows restarting the lookup, for
implementing inheritance, etc.  Obsoletes
specifier-matching-find-charset, or whatever it is.  The restart
argument is opaque, and is returned as a multiple value of
restart-specifier-instance.  (It's actually an integer with the low
bits holding the locale and the other bits count int to the list)
attached to the locale.)

@node Future Work -- Display Tables, Future Work -- Making Elisp Function Calls Faster, Future Work -- Specifiers, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Display Tables
@cindex future work, display tables
@cindex display tables, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

#### It would also be really nice if you could specify that the
characters come out in hex instead of in octal.  Mule does that by
adding a @code{ctl-hexa} variable similar to @code{ctl-arrow}, but
that's bogus -- we need a more general solution.  I think you need to
extend the concept of display tables into a more general conversion
mechanism.  Ideally you could specify a Lisp function that converts
characters, but this violates the Second Golden Rule and besides would
make things way way way way slow.

So instead, we extend the display-table concept, which was historically
limited to 256-byte vectors, to one of the following:

@enumerate
@item
A 256-entry vector, for backward compatibility;
@item
char-table, mapping characters to values;
@item
range-table, mapping ranges of characters to values;
@item
a list of the above.
@end enumerate

The fourth option allows you to specify multiple display tables instead
of just one.  Each display table can specify conversions for some
characters and leave others unchanged.  The way the character gets
displayed is determined by the first display table with a binding for
that character.  This way, you could call a function
@code{enable-hex-display} that adds a hex display-table to the list of
display tables for the current buffer.

#### ...not yet implemented...  Also, we extend the concept of "mapping"
to include a printf-like spec.  Thus you can make all extended
characters show up as hex with a display table like this:

@example
    #s(range-table data ((256 524288) (format "%x")))
@end example

Since more than one display table is possible, you have
great flexibility in mapping ranges of characters.

@node Future Work -- Making Elisp Function Calls Faster, Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement, Future Work -- Display Tables, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Making Elisp Function Calls Faster
@cindex future work, making Elisp function calls faster
@cindex making Elisp function calls faster, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@strong{Abstract: }This page describes many optimizations that can be
made to the existing Elisp function call mechanism without too much
effort.  The most important optimizations can probably be implemented
with only a day or two of work.  I think it's important to do this work
regardless of whether we eventually decide to replace the Lisp engine.

Many complaints have been made about the speed of Elisp, and in
particular about the slowness in executing function calls, and rightly
so.  If you look at the implementation of the @code{funcall} function,
you'll notice that it does an incredible amount of work.  Now logically,
it doesn't need to be so.  Let's look first from the theoretical
standpoint at what absolutely needs to be done to call a Lisp function.

First, let's look at the situation that would exist if we were smart
enough to have made lexical scoping be the default language policy.  We
know at compile time exactly which code can reference the variables that
are the formal parameters for the function being called (specifically,
only the code that is part of that function's definition) and where
these references are.  As a result, we can simply push all the values of
the variables onto a stack, and convert all the variable references in
the function definition into stack references.  Therefore, binding
lexically-scoped parameters in preparation for a function call involves
nothing more than pushing the values of the parameters onto a stack and
then setting a new value for the frame pointer, at the same time
remembering the old one.  Because the byte-code interpreter has a
stack-based architecture, however, the parameter values have already
been pushed onto the stack at the time of the function call invocation.
Therefore, binding the variables involves doing nothing at all, other
than dealing with the frame pointer.

With dynamic scoping, the situation is somewhat more complicated.
Because the parameters can be referenced anywhere, and these references
cannot be located at compile time, their values have to be stored into a
global table that maps the name of the parameter to its current value.
In Elisp, this table is called the @dfn{obarray}.  Variable binding in
Elisp is done using the C function @code{specbind()}. (This stands for
"special variable binding" where @dfn{special} is the standard Lisp
terminology for a dynamically-scoped variable.)  What @code{specbind()}
does, essentially, is retrieve the old value of the variable out of the
obarray, remember the value by pushing it, along with the name of the
variable, onto what's called the @dfn{specpdl} stack, and then store the
new value into the obarray.  The term "specpdl" means @dfn{Special
Variable Pushdown List}, where @dfn{Pushdown List} is an archaic computer
science term for a stack that used to be popular at MIT.  These binding
operations, however, should still not take very much time because of the
use of symbols, i.e. because the location in the obarray where the
variable's value is stored has already been determined (specifically, it
was determined at the time that the byte code was loaded and the symbol
created), so no expensive hash table lookups need to be performed.

An actual function invocation in Elisp does a great deal more work,
however, than was just outlined above.  Let's just take a look at what
happens when one byte-compiled function invokes another byte-compiled
function, checking for places where unnecessary work is being done and
determining how to optimize these places.

@enumerate
@item 

The byte-compiled function's parameter list is stored in exactly the
format that the programmer entered it in, which is to say as a Lisp
list, complete with @code{&amp;optional} and @code{&amp;rest} keywords.
This list has to be parsed for @emph{every} function invocation, which
means that for every element in a list, the element is checked to see
whether it's the @code{&amp;optional} or @code{&amp;rest} keywords, its
surrounding cons cell is checked to make sure that it is indeed a cons
cell, the @code{QUIT} macro is called, etc.  What should be happening
here is that the argument list is parsed exactly once, at the time that
the byte code is loaded, and converted into a C array.  The C array
should be stored as part of the byte-code object.  The C array should
also contain, in addition to the symbols themselves, the number of
required and optional arguments.  At function call time, the C array can
be very quickly retrieved and processed.
@item 

For every variable that is to be bound, the @code{specbind()} function
is called.  This actually does quite a lot of things, including:

@enumerate
@item 

Checking the symbol argument to the function to make sure it's actually
a symbol.
@item 

Checking for specpdl stack overflow, and increasing its size as
necessary.
@item 

Calling @code{symbol_value_buffer_local_info()} to retrieve buffer local
information for the symbol, and then processing the return value from
this function in a series of if statements.
@item 

Actually storing the old value onto the specpdl stack.
@item 

Calling @code{Fset()} to change the variable's value.

@end enumerate

@end enumerate

The entire series of calls to @code{specbind()} should be inline and
merged into the argument processing code as a single tight loop, with no
function calls in the vast majority of cases.  The @code{specbind()}
logic should be streamlined as follows:

@enumerate
@item 

The symbol argument type checking is unnecessary.
@item 

The check for the specpdl stack overflow needs to be done only once, not
once per argument.
@item 

All of the remaining logic should be boiled down as follows:

@enumerate
@item 

Retrieve the old value from the symbol's value cell.
@item 

If this value is a symbol-value-magic object, then call the real
@code{specbind()} to do the work.
@item 

Otherwise, we know that nothing complicated needs to be done, so we
simply push the symbol and its value onto the specpdl stack, and then
replace the value in the symbol's value cell.
@item 

The only logic that we are omitting is the code in @code{Fset()} that
checks to make sure a constant isn't being set.  These checks should be
made at the time that the byte code for the function is loaded and the C
array of parameters to the function is created.  (Whether a symbol is
constant or not is generally known at XEmacs compile time.  The only
issue here is with symbols whose names begin with a colon.  These
symbols should simply be disallowed completely as parameter names.)

@end enumerate

@end enumerate

Other optimizations that could be done are:

@itemize
@item 

At the beginning of the function that implements the byte-code
interpreter (this is the Lisp primitive @code{byte-code}), the string
containing the actual byte code is converted into an array of integers.
I added this code specifically for MULE so that the byte-code engine
didn't have to deal with the complexities of the internal string format
for text.  This conversion, however, is generally useful because on
modern processors accessing 32-bit values out of an array is
significantly faster than accessing unaligned 8-bit values.  This
conversion takes time, though, and should be done once at load time
rather than each time the byte code is executed.  This array should be
stored in the byte-code object.  Currently, this is a bit tricky to do,
because @code{byte-code} is not actually passed the byte-code object,
but rather three of its elements.  We can't just change @code{byte-code}
so that it is directly passed the byte-code object because this
function, with its existing argument calling pattern, is called directly
from compiled Elisp files.  What we can and should do, however, is
create a subfunction that does take a byte-code object and actually
implements the byte-code interpreter engine.  Whenever the C code wants
to execute byte code, it calls this subfunction.  @code{byte-code}
itself also calls this subfunction after conjuring up an appropriate
byte-code object and storing its arguments into this object.  With a
small amount of work, it's possible to do this conjuring in such a way
that it doesn't generate any garbage.
@item 

At the end of a function call, the parameter bindings that have been
done need to be undone.  This is standardly done by calling
@code{unbind_to()}.  Just as for a @code{specbind()}, this function does
a lot of work that is unnecessary in the vast majority of cases, and it
could also be inlined and streamlined.
@item 

As part of each Elisp function call, a whole bunch of checks are done
for a series of unlikely but possible conditions that may occur.  These
include, for example,

@itemize
@item 

Calling the @code{QUIT} macro, which essentially involves
checking a global volatile variable to see whether additional processing
needs to be done.
@item 

Checking whether a garbage collection needs to be done.
@item 

Checking the variable @code{debug_on_next_call}.
@item 

Checking for whether Elisp profiling is active.  (An additional
optimization that's perhaps not worth the effort is to do some
post-processing on the array of integers after it has been converted.
For example, whenever a 16-bit value occurs in the byte code, it has
to be encoded as two separate 8-bit values.  These values could be
combined.  The tricky part here is that all of the places where a goto
occurs across the place where this modification is made would have to
have their offsets changed.  Other such optimizations can easily be
imagined as well.)

@end itemize

@item 

With a little bit smarter code, it should be possible to make a
single trip variable that indicates whether any of these conditions is
true.  This variable would be updated by any code that changes the
actual variables whose values are checked in the various checks just
mentioned.  (By the way, all of this is occurring in the C function
@code{funcall_recording_as()}.)  There is a little bit of code
between each of the checks.  This code would simply have to be
duplicated between the two cases where this general trip variable is
true and is false.  (Note: the optimization detailed in this item is
probably not worth doing on the first pass.)

@end itemize

@node Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement,  Future Work -- Better Rendering Support, Future Work -- Making Elisp Function Calls Faster, Future Work
@section Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement
@cindex future work, lisp engine replacement
@cindex lisp engine replacement, future work

@menu
* Future Work -- Lisp Engine Discussion::  
* Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement -- Implementation::  
* Future Work -- Startup File Modification by Packages::  
@end menu

@node Future Work -- Lisp Engine Discussion, Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement -- Implementation, Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement, Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement
@subsection Future Work -- Lisp Engine Discussion
@cindex future work, lisp engine discussion
@cindex lisp engine discussion, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@strong{Abstract: }Recently there has been a great deal of talk on the
XEmacs mailing lists about potential changes to the XEmacs Lisp engine.
Usually the discussion has centered around the question which is better,
Common Lisp or Scheme?  This is certainly an interesting debate topic,
but it didn't seem to have much practical relevance to me, so I vowed to
stay out of the discussion.  Recently, however, it seems that people are
losing sight of the broader picture.  For example, nobody seems to be
asking the question, ``"Would an extension language other than Lisp or
Scheme (perhaps not a Lisp variant at all) be more appropriate?"'' Nor
does anybody seem to be addressing what I consider to be the most
fundamental question, is changing the extension language a good thing to
do?

I think it would be a mistake at this point in XEmacs development to
begin any project involving fundamental changes to the Lisp engine or to
the XEmacs Lisp language itself.  It would take a huge amount of effort
to complete even part of this project, and would be a major drain on the
already-insufficient resources of the XEmacs development community.
Most of the gains that are purported to stem from a project such as this
could be obtained with far less effort by making more incremental
changes to the XEmacs core.  I think it would be an even bigger mistake
to change the actual XEmacs extension language (as opposed to just
changing the Lisp engine, making few, if any, externally visible
changes).  The only language change that I could possibly imagine
justifying would involve switching to some ubiquitous web language, such
as Java and JavaScript, or Perl.  (Even among those, I think Java would
be the only possibility that really makes sense).

In the rest of this document I'll present the broader issues that would
be involved in changing the Lisp engine or extension language.  This
should make clear why I've come to believe as I do.

@subheading Is everyone clear on the difference between interface and implementation?

There seems to be a great deal of confusion concerning the difference
between interface and implementation.  In the context of XEmacs,
changing the interface means switching to a different extension language
such as Common Lisp, Scheme, Java, etc.  Changing the implementation
means using a different Lisp engine.  There is obviously some relation
between these two issues, but there is no particular requirement that
one be changed if the other is changed.  It is quite possible, for
example, to imagine taking the underlying engine for any of the various
Lisp dialects in existence, and adapting it so that it implements the
same Elisp extension language that currently exists.  The vast majority
of the purported benefits that we would get from changing the extension
language could just as easily be obtained while making minimal changes
to the external Elisp interface.  This way nearly all existing Elisp
programs would continue to work, there would be no need to translate
Elisp programs into some other language or to simultaneously support two
incompatible Lisp variants, and there would be no need for users or
package authors to learn a new extension language that would be just as
unfamiliar to the vast majority of them as Elisp is.

@subheading Why should we change the Lisp engine?

Let's go over the possible reasons for changing the Lisp engine.

@subsubheading Speed.

Changing the Lisp engine might make XEmacs faster.  However,
consider the following.

@enumerate
@item           

XEmacs will get faster over time without any development effort at all
because computers will get faster.
@item           

Perhaps the biggest causes of the slowness of XEmacs are not related to
the Lisp engine at all.  It has been asserted, for example, that the
slowness of XEmacs is primarily due to the redisplay mechanism, to the
handling of insertion and deletion of text in a buffer, to the event
loop, etc.  Nobody has done any real studies to determine what the
actual cause of slowness is.
@item           

Emacs 18 seems plenty fast enough to most people.  However, Emacs 18
also had a worse Lisp engine and a worse byte compiler than XEmacs.
@item           

Significant speed increases in the execution of Lisp code could be
achieved without too much effort by working on the existing byte code
interpreter and function call mechanism a bit.

@end enumerate

@subsubheading Memory usage.

A new Lisp engine with a better garbage collection mechanism might make
more efficient use of memory; for example, through the use of a
relocating garbage collector.  However, consider this:

@enumerate
@item           

A new Lisp engine would probably have a larger memory footprint, perhaps
a significantly larger one.
@item           

The worst memory problems might not be due to Lisp object inefficiency
at all.  The problems could simply be due mainly to the inefficient
buffer representation.  Nobody has come up with any concrete numbers on
where the real problem lies.

@end enumerate

@subsubheading Robustness.

A new Lisp engine might well be more robust.  (On the other hand, it
might not be.  It is not always easy to tell).  However, I think that
the biggest problems with robustness are in the part of the C code that
is not concerned with implementing the Lisp engine.  The redisplay
mechanism and the unexec mechanism are probably the biggest sources of
robustness problems.  I think the biggest robustness problems that are
related to the Lisp engine concern the use of GCPRO declarations.  The
entire GCPRO mechanism is ill-conceived and unsafe.  The only real way
to make this safe would be to do conservative garbage collection over
the C stack and to eliminate the GCPRO declarations entirely.  But how
many of the Lisp engines that are being considered have such a mechanism
built into them?

@subsubheading Maintainability.

A new Lisp engine might well improve the maintainability of XEmacs by
offloading the maintenance of the Lisp engine.  However, we need to make
very sure that this is, in fact, the case before embarking on a project
like this.  We would almost certainly have to make significant
modifications to any Lisp engine that we choose to integrate, and
without the active and committed support and cooperation of the
developers of that Lisp engine, the maintainability problem would
actually get worse.

@subsubheading Features.

A new Lisp engine might have built in support for various features that
we would like to add to the XEmacs extension language, such as lexical
scoping and an object system.

@subheading Why would we want to change the extension language?

Possible reasons for changing the extension language include:

@subsubheading More standard. 

Switching to a language that is more standard and more commonly in use
would be beneficial for various reasons.  First of all, the language
that is more commonly used and more familiar would make it easier for
users to write their own extensions and in general, increase the
acceptance of XEmacs.  Also, an accepted standard probably has had a lot
more thought put into it than any language interface created by the
XEmacs developers themselves.  Furthermore, if our extension language is
being actively developed and supported, much of the work that we would
otherwise have to do ourselves is transferred elsewhere.

However, both Scheme and Common Lisp flunk the familiarity test.
Neither language is being actively used for program development outside
of small research communities, and few prospective authors of XEmacs
extensions will be familiar with any Lisp variant for real world uses.
(I consider the argument that Scheme is often used in introductory
programming courses to be irrelevant.  Many existing programmers were
taught Pascal in their introductory programming courses.  How many of
them would actually be comfortable writing a program in Pascal?)
Furthermore, someone who wants to learn Lisp can't exactly go to their
neighborhood bookstore and pick up a book on this topic.

@subsubheading Ease of use.

There are endless arguments about which language is easiest to use.  In
practice, this largely boils down to which languages are most familiar.

@subsubheading Object oriented.

The object-oriented paradigm is the dominant one in use today for new
languages.  User interface concepts in particular are expressed very
naturally in an object-oriented system.  However, neither Scheme nor
Common Lisp has been designed with object orientation in mind.  There is
a standard object system for Common Lisp, but it is extremely complex
and difficult to understand.

@node Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement -- Implementation, Future Work -- Startup File Modification by Packages, Future Work -- Lisp Engine Discussion, Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement
@subsection Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement -- Implementation
@cindex future work, lisp engine replacement, implementation
@cindex lisp engine replacement, implementation, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

Let's take a look at the sort of work that would be required if we were
to replace the existing Elisp engine in XEmacs with some other engine,
for example, the Clisp engine.  I'm assuming here, of course, that we
are not going to be changing the interface here at the same time, which
is to say that we will be keeping the same Elisp language that we
currently have as the extension language for XEmacs, except perhaps for
incremental changes that we will make, such as lexical scoping and
proper structure support in an attempt to gradually move the language
towards an upwardly-compatible goal, such as Common Lisp.  I am writing
this page primarily as food for thought.  I feel fairly strongly that
actually doing this work would be a big waste of effort that would
inevitably become a huge time sink on the part of nearly everyone
involved in XEmacs development, and not only for the ones who were
supposed to be actually doing the engine change.  I feel that most of
the desired changes that we want for the language and/or the engine can
be achieved with much less effort and time through incremental changes
to the existing code base.

First of all, in order to make a successful Lisp engine change in
XEmacs, it is vitally important that the work be done through a series
of incremental stages where at the end of each stage XEmacs can be
compiled and run, and it works.  It is tempting to try to make the
change all at once, but this would be disastrous.  If the resulting
product worked at all, it would inevitably contain a huge number of
subtle and extremely difficult to track down bugs, and it would be next
to impossible to determine which of the myriad changes made introduced
the bug.

Now let's look at what the possible stages of implementation could be.

@subsubheading An Extra C Preprocessing Stage

The first step would be to introduce another preprocessing stage for the
XEmacs C code, which is done before the C compiler itself is invoked on
the code, and before the standard C preprocessor runs.  The C
preprocessor is simply not powerful enough to do many of the things we
would like to do in the C code.  The existing results of this have been
a combination of a lot of hacked up and tricky-to-maintain stuff (such
as the @code{DEFUN} macro, and the associated @code{DEFSUBR}), as well
as code constructs that are difficult to write.  (Consider for example,
attempting to do structured exception handling, such as catch/throw and
unwind-protect constructs), as well as code that is potentially or
actually unsafe (such as the uses of @code{alloca}), which could easily
cause stack overflow with large amounts of memory allocated in this
fashion.)  The problem is that the C preprocessor does not allow macros
to have the power of an actual language, such as C or Lisp.  What our
own preprocessor should do is allow us to define macros, whose
definitions are simply functions written in some language which are
executed at compile time, and whose arguments are the actual argument
for the macro call, as well as an environment which should have a data
structure representation of the C code in the file and allow this
environment to be queried and modified.  It can be debated what the
language should be that these extensions are written in.  Whatever the
language chosen, it needs to be a very standard language and a language
whose compiler or interpreter is available on all of the platforms that
we could ever possibly consider putting XEmacs to, which is basically to
say all the platforms in existence.  One obvious choice is C, because
there will obviously be a C compiler available, because it is needed to
compile XEmacs itself.  Another possibility is Perl, which is already
installed on most systems, and is universally available on all others.
This language has powerful text processing facilities which would
probably make it possible to implement the macro definitions more
quickly and easily; however, this might also encourage bad coding
practices in the macros (often simple text processing is not
appropriate, and more sophisticated parsing or recursive data structure
processing needs to be done instead), and we'd have to make sure that
the nested data structure that comprises the environment could be
represented well in Perl.  Elisp would not be a good choice because it
would create a bootstrapping problem.  Other possible languages, such as
Python, are not appropriate, because most programmers are unfamiliar
with this language (creating a maintainability problem) and the Python
interpreter would have to be included and compiled as part of the XEmacs
compilation process (another maintainability problem).  Java is still
too much in flux to be considered at this point.

The macro facility that we will provide needs to add two features to the
language: the ability to define a macro, and the ability to call a
macro.  One good way of doing this would be to make use of special
characters that have no meaning in the C language (or in C++ for that
matter), and thus can never appear in a C file outside of comments and
strings.  Two obvious characters are the @@ sign and the $ sign.  We
could, for example, use @code{@@} defined to define new macros, and the
@code{$} sign followed by the macro name to call a macro.  (Proponents
of Perl will note that both of these characters have a meaning in Perl.
This should not be a problem, however, because the way that macros are
defined and called inside of another macro should not be through the use
of any special characters which would in effect be extending the macro
language, but through function calls made in the normal way for the
language.)

The program that actually implements this extra preprocessing stage
needs to know a certain amount about how to parse C code.  In
particular, it needs to know how to recognize comments, strings,
character constants, and perhaps certain other kinds of C tokens, and
needs to be able to parse C code down to the statement level.  (This is
to say it needs to be able to parse function definitions and to separate
out the statements, @code{if} blocks, @code{while} blocks, etc. within
these definitions.  It probably doesn't, however need to parse the
contents of a C expression.)  The preprocessing program should work
first by parsing the entire file into a data structure (which may just
contain expressions in the form of literal strings rather than a data
structure representing the parsed expression).  This data structure
should become the environment parameter that is passed as an argument to
macros as mentioned above.  The implementation of the parsing could and
probably should be done using @code{lex} and @code{yacc}.  One good idea
is simply to steal some of the @code{lex} and @code{yacc} code that is
part of GCC.

Here are some possibilities that could be implemented as part of the
preprocessing:

@enumerate
@item 

A proper way of doing the @code{DEFUN} macros.  These could, for
example, take an argument list in the form of a Lisp argument list
(complete with keyword parameters and other complex features) and
automatically generate the appropriate @code{subr} structure, the
appropriate C function definition header, and the appropriate call to
the @code{DEFSUBR} initialization function.
@item 

A truly safe and easy to use implementation of the @code{alloca}
function.  This could allocate the memory in any fashion it chooses
(calling @code{malloc} using a large global array, or a series of such
arrays, etc.) an @code{insert} in the appropriate places to
automatically free up this memory.  (Appropriate places here would be at
the end of the function and before any return statements.  Non-local
exits can be handled in the function that actually implements the
non-local exit.)
@item 

If we allow for the possibility of having an arbitrary Lisp engine, we
can't necessarily assume that we can call Lisp primitives implemented in
C from other C functions by simply making a function all.  Perhaps
something special needs to happen when this is done.  This could be
handled fairly easily by having our new and improved @code{DEFUN} macro
define a new macro for use when calling a primitive.
@end enumerate

@subsubheading Make the Existing Lisp Engine be Self-contained.

The goal of this stage is to gradually build up a self-contained Lisp
engine out of the existing XEmacs core, which has no dependencies on any
of the code elsewhere in the XEmacs core, and has a well-defined and
black box-style interface.  (This is to say that the rest of the C code
should not be able to access the implementation of the Lisp engine, and
should make as few assumptions as possible about how this implementation
works).  The Lisp engine could, and probably should, be built up as a
separate library which can be compiled on its own without any of the
rest of the XEmacs C code, and can be tested in this configuration as
well.

The creation of this engine library should be done as a series of
subsets, each of which moves more code out of the XEmacs core and into
the engine library, and XEmacs should be compilable and runnable between
each sub-step.  One possible series of sub-steps would be to first
create an engine that does only object allocation and garbage
collection, then as a second sub-step, move in the code that handles
symbols, symbol values, and simple binding, and then finally move in the
code that handles control structures, function calling, @code{byte-code}
execution, exception handling, etc.  (It might well be possible to
further separate this last sub-step).

@subsubheading Removal of Assumptions About the Lisp Engine Implementation

Currently, the XEmacs C code makes all sorts of assumptions about the
implementation of the Lisp engine, particularly in the areas of object
allocation, object representation, and garbage collection.  A different
Lisp engine may well have different ways of doing these implementations,
and thus the XEmacs C code must be rid of any assumptions about these
implementations.  This is a tough and tedious job, but it needs to be
done.  Here are some examples:

@enumerate
@item 

@code{GCPRO} must go.  The @code{GCPRO} mechanism is tedious,
error-prone, unmaintainable, and fundamentally unsafe.  As anyone who
has worked on the C Core of XEmacs knows, figuring out where to insert
the @code{GCPRO} calls is an exercise in black magic, and debugging
crashes as a result of incorrect @code{GCPROing} is an absolute
nightmare.  Furthermore, the entire mechanism is fundamentally unsafe.
Even if we were to use the extra preprocessing stage detailed above to
automatically generate @code{GCPRO} and @code{UNGCPRO} calls for all
Lisp object variables occurring anywhere in the C code, there are still
places where we could be bitten.  Consider, for example, code which
calls @code{cons} and where the two arguments to this functions are both
calls to the @code{append} function.  Now the @code{append} function
generates new Lisp objects, and it also calls @code{QUIT}, which could
potentially execute arbitrary Lisp code and cause a garbage collection
before returning control to the @code{append} function.  Now in order to
generate the arguments to the @code{cons} function, the @code{append}
function is called twice in a row.  When the first @code{append} call
returns, new Lisp data has been created, but has no @code{GCPRO}
pointers to it.  If the second @code{append} call causes a garbage
collection, the Lisp data from the first @code{append} call will be
collected and recycled, which is likely to lead to obscure and
impossible-to-debug crashes.  The only way around this would be to
rewrite all function calls whose parameters are Lisp objects in terms of
temporary variables, so that no such function calls ever contain other
function calls as arguments.  This would not only be annoying to
implement, even in a smart preprocessor, but would make the C code
become incredibly slow because of all the constant updating of the
@code{GCPRO} lists.
@item 

The only proper solution here is to completely do away with the
@code{GCPRO} mechanism and simply do conservative garbage collection
over the C stack.  There are already portable implementations of
conservative pointer marking over the C stack, and these could easily be
adapted for use in the Elisp garbage collector.  If, as outlined above,
we use an extra preprocessing stage to create a new version of
@code{alloca} that allocates its memory elsewhere than actually on the C
stack, and we ensure that we don't declare any large arrays as local
variables, but instead use @code{alloca}, then we can be guaranteed that
the C stack is small and thus that the conservative pointer marking
stage will be fast and not very likely to find false matches.
@item 

Removing the @code{GCPRO} declarations as just outlined would also
remove the assumption currently made that garbage collection can occur
only in certain places in the C code, rather than in any arbitrary spot.
(For example, any time an allocation of Lisp data happens).  In order to
make things really safe, however, we also have to remove another
assumption as detailed in the following item.
@item 

Lisp objects might be relocatable.  Currently, the C code assumes that
Lisp objects other than string data are not relocatable and therefore
it's safe to pass around and hold onto the actual pointers for the C
structures that implement the Lisp objects.  Current code, for example,
assumes that a @code{Lisp_Object} of type buffer and a C pointer to a
@code{struct buffer} mean basically the same thing, and indiscriminately
passes the two kinds of buffer pointers around.  With relocatable Lisp
objects, the pointers to the C structures might change at any time.
(Remember, we are now assuming that a garbage collection can happen at
basically any point).  All of the C code needs to be changed so that
Lisp objects are always passed around using a Lisp object type, and the
underlying pointers are only retrieved at the time when a particular
data element out of the structure is needed.  (As an aside, here's
another reason why Lisp objects, instead of pointers, should always be
passed around.  If pointers are passed around, it's conceivable that at
the time a garbage collection occurs, the only reference to a Lisp
object (for example, a deleted buffer) would be in the form of a C
pointer rather than a Lisp object.  In such a case, the conservative
pointer marking mechanism might not notice the reference, especially if,
in an attempt to eliminate false matches and make the code generally
more efficient, it will be written so that it will look for actual Lisp
object references.)
@item 

I would go a step farther and completely eliminate the macros that
convert a Lisp object reference into a C pointer.  This way the only way
to access an element out of a Lisp object would be to use the macro for
that element, which in one atomic operation de-references the Lisp
object reference and retrieves the value contained in the element.  We
probably do need the ability to retrieve actual C pointers, though.  For
example, in the case where an array is stored in a Lisp object, or
simply for efficiency purposes where we might want some code to retrieve
the C pointer for a Lisp object, and work on that directly to avoid a
whole bunch of extra indirections.  I think the way to do this would be
through the use of a special locking construct implemented as part of
the extra preprocessor stage mentioned above.  This would essentially be
what you might call a @dfn{lock block}, just like a @code{while} block.
You'd write the word @code{lock} followed by a parenthesized expression
that retrieves the C pointer and stores it into a variable that is
scoped only within the lock block and followed in turn by some code in
braces, which is the actual code associated with the lock block, and
which can make use of this pointer.  While the code inside the lock
block is executing, that particular pointer and the object pointed to by
it is guaranteed not to be relocated.
@item 

If all the XEmacs C code were converted according to these rules, there
would be no restrictions on the sorts of implementations that can be
used for the garbage collector.  It would be possible, for example, to
have an incremental asynchronous relocating garbage collector that
operated continuously in another thread while XEmacs was running.
@item 

The C implementation of Lisp objects might not, and probably should not,
be visible to the rest of the XEmacs C code.  It should theoretically be
possible, for example, to implement Lisp objects entirely in terms of
association lists, rather than using C structures in the standard way.
(This may be an extreme example, but it's good to keep in mind an
example such as this when cleaning up the XEmacs C code).  The changes
mentioned in the previous item would go a long way towards removing this
assumption.  The only places where this assumption might still be made
would be inside of the lock blocks where an actual pointer is retrieved.
(Also, of course, we'd have to change the way that Lisp objects are
defined in C so that this is done with some function calls and new and
improved macros rather than by having the XEmacs C code actually define
the structures.  This sort of thing would probably have to be done in
any case once the allocation mechanism is moved into a separate
library.)  With some thought it should be possible to define the lock
block interface in such a way as to remove any assumptions about the
implementation of Lisp objects.
@item 

C code may not be able to call Lisp primitives that are defined in C
simply by making standard C function calls.  There might need to be some
wrapper around all such calls.  This could be achieved cleanly through
the extra preprocessing step mentioned above, in line with the example
described there.

@end enumerate

@subsubheading Actually Replacing the Engine.

Once we've done all of the work mentioned in the previous steps (and
admittedly, this is quite a lot of work), we should have an XEmacs that
still uses what is essentially the old and previously existing Lisp
engine, but which is ready to have its Lisp engine replaced.  The
replacement might proceed as follows:

@enumerate
@item 

Identify any further changes that need to be made to the engine
interface that we have defined as a result of the previous steps so that
features and idiosyncrasies of various Lisp engines that we examine
could be properly supported.
@item 

Pick a Lisp engine and write an interface layer that sits on top of this
Lisp engine and makes it adhere to what I'll now call the XEmacs Lisp
engine interface.
@item 

Strongly consider creating, if we haven't already done so, a test suite
that can test the XEmacs Lisp engine interface when used with a
stand-alone Lisp engine.
@item 

Test the hell out of the Lisp engine that we've chosen when combined
with its XEmacs Lisp engine interface layer as a stand-alone program.
@item 

Now finally attach this stand-alone program to XEmacs itself.  Debug and
fix any further problems that ensue (and there inevitably will be such
problems), updating the test suite as we go along so that if it were run
again on the old and buggy interfaced Lisp engine, it would note the
bug.

@end enumerate

@node Future Work -- Startup File Modification by Packages,  , Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement -- Implementation, Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement
@subsection Future Work -- Startup File Modification by Packages
@cindex future work, startup file modification by packages
@cindex startup file modification by packages, future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

OK, we need to create a design document for all of this, including:

PRINCIPLE #1: Whenever you have auto-generated stuff, @strong{CLEARLY}
indicate this in comments around the stuff.  These comments get
searched for, and used to locate the existing generated stuff to
replace.  Custom currently doesn't do this.

PRINCIPLE #2: Currently, lots of functions want to add code to the
.emacs. (e.g. I get prompted for my mail address from
add-change-log-entry, and then prompted if I want to make this
permanent).  There needs to be a Lisp API for working with arbitrary
code to be added to a user's startup.  This API hides all the details
of which file to put the fragment in, where in it, how to mark it with
magical comments of the right kind so that previous fragments can be
replaced, etc.

PRINCIPLE #3: @strong{ALL} generated stuff should be loaded before any
user-written init stuff.  This way the user can override the generated
settings.  Although in the case of customize, it may work when the
custom stuff is at the end of the init file, it surely won't work for
arbitrary code fragments (which typically do @code{setq} or the like).

PRINCIPLE #4: As much as possible, generated stuff should be place in
separate files from non-generated stuff.  Otherwise it's inevitable
that some corruption is going to result.

PRINCIPLE #5: Packages are encouraged, as much as possible, to work
within the customize model and store all their customizations there.
However, if they really need to have their own init files, these files
should be placed in .xemacs/, given normal names
(e.g. @file{saved-abbrevs.el} not .abbrevs), and there should be some magic
comment at the top of the file that causes it to get automatically
loaded while loading a user's init file. (Alternatively, the
above-named API could specify a function that lets a package specify
that they want such-and-such file loaded from the init file, and have
the specifics of this get handled correctly.)

OVERARCHING GOAL: The overarching goal is to provide a unified
mechanism for packages to store state and setting information about
the user and what they were doing when XEmacs exited, so that the same
or a similar environment can be automatically set up the next time.
In general, we are working more and more towards being a truly GUI app
where users' settings are easy to change and get remembered correctly
and consistently from one session to the next, rather than requiring
nasty hacking in elisp.

Hrvoje, do you have any interest in this?  How about you, Martin?
This seems like it might be up your alley.  This stuff has been
ad-hocked since kingdom come, and it's high time that we make this
work properly so that it could be relied upon, and a lot of things
could "just work".



@node Future Work -- Better Rendering Support, , Future Work -- Lisp Engine Replacement,  Future Work
@section Future Work -- Better Rendering Support
@cindex future work, better rendering support
@cindex better rendering support, future work

This section was written by Stephen Turnbull <stephen@@xemacs.org>, so
don't blame Ben (or Eric and Matthias, for that matter).  Feel free to
add, edit, and share the blame, guys!

@c #### Make these @urlref's!!
As of late November 2004, this principally means adding support for the
@file{Xft} library, which provides a more robust @emph{font
configuration} mechanism via Keith Packard's @file{fontconfig} library
improved glyph rendering, including antialiasing, via the
@file{freetype} library, and client-side rendering (saving bandwidth and
server memory) via the @file{XRender extension}.  In fact, patches which
provide Xft support have been available for several years, but the
authors have been unwilling to deal with several important issues which
block integration.  These are @emph{Mule}, and more generally,
@emph{face} support; @emph{widget} support (including the toolbar and
menubar); and @emph{redisplay refactoring}.

@c #### Describe Alexey Gladkov and Yury Konovalov's work.

However, in late 2003 Eric Knauel <knauel@@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de>
and Matthias Neubauer <neubauer@@informatik.uni-freiburg.de> put forward
a relatively complete patch which was robust to daily use in ISO 8859-1
locales, and Stephen Turnbull began work on the integration issues.  At
this point a (private) CVS branch is available for Stephen's patch
(branch point tag @samp{sjt-xft-bp}, branch tag @samp{sjt-xft}), and
one may be made available for the Knauel-Matthias patch soon.

@menu
* Better Rendering Support -- Review Criteria::
* Better Rendering Support -- Implementation::
* Better Rendering Support -- Current Status::
* Better Rendering Support -- Configuration with the Interim Patches::
* Better Rendering Support -- Modern Font Support::
@end menu


@node Better Rendering Support -- Review Criteria, Better Rendering Support -- Implementation, , Future Work -- Better Rendering Support
@subsection Better Rendering Support -- Review Criteria
@cindex better rendering support, issues
@cindex issues, better rendering support

Of course it's ``unfair'' to demand that the implementers of a nice
feature like anti-aliasing support deal with accumulated cruft of the
last few years, but somebody must, sometime soon.  Even core developers
are complaining about how slow XEmacs is in some applications, and there
is reason to believe that some of the problem is in redisplay.
Adding more @emph{ad hoc} features to redisplay will make the whole
module more complex and unintelligible.  Even if it doesn't inherently
further detract from efficiency, it will surely make reform and
refactoring harder.

Similar considerations apply to Mule support.  If Xft support is not
carefully designed, or implemented with Mule support soon, it will
undoubtedly make later Mule implementation far more difficult than it
needs to be, and require redundant work be done (@emph{e.g.}, on
@samp{Options} menu support).

Besides the design issue---and many users are requesting more
flexibility, primarily face support, from the widgets---with widget
support there is also an aesthetic issue.  It is horribly unimpressive to
have clunky bitmapped fonts on the decorations when pleasant antialiased
fonts are available in the buffer.

Finally, these issues interact.  Widgets and faces are inherently
heavyweight objects, requiring orders of magnitude more computation than
simply displaying a string in a fixed font.  This will have an
efficiency impact, of course.  And they interact with each other; Mule
was designed for use in buffers and display in Emacs windows---but a
widget's content is usually not a buffer, and widgets need not be
displayed in a window, but may appear in other contexts, especially in
the gutters.  So specifiers will probably have to be reworked, in order
to properly support display of different faces in non-buffer, non-window
contexts.

@node Better Rendering Support -- Implementation, Better Rendering Support -- Current Status, Better Rendering Support -- Review Criteria, Future Work -- Better Rendering Support
@subsection Better Rendering Support -- Implementation
@cindex better rendering support, implementation
@cindex implementation, better rendering support

Stephen is thinking in terms of the following components of a
comprehensive proposal.

@table @strong
@item Font configuration
In XEmacs, font configuration is handled via @emph{faces}.  Currently
XEmacs uses a special type of @emph{font specifier} to map XEmacs
locales to font names.  Especially under X11, this can cause annoying
problems because of the unreliability of X servers' mappings from
@samp{XLFD} names to X11 fonts, over which XEmacs has no influence
whatsoever.  However, the @file{fontconfig} library which is used with
@file{Xft} provides much more reliable mapping, along with a more
reliably parsable naming scheme similar to that used by TrueType fonts
on MS Windows and the Macintosh.  Since the capabilities of font
specifiers and @file{fontconfig} overlap, we should consider using
@file{fontconfig} instead of @samp{XLFD} names.  This implies that use
of @file{Xft}'s rendering functionality should be separated from use of
@file{fontconfig}.

@item fontconfig
Fontconfig is dramatically different from the X model in several ways.
In particular, @emph{fontconfig always returns a font}.  However, the
font returned need not be anything like the desired font.  This means
that XEmacs must adopt a strategy of delegating the search to
fontconfig, then sanity-checking the return, rather than trying to use
the fontconfig API to search using techniques appropriate for the X11
core font API.

@item Font menus
The @samp{Options->Font} and @samp{Options->Font Sizes} menus are
broken, by design, not just by @file{Xft}.  Although they work better
in Eric and Matthias's patch than in Stephen's, even their version has
the problem that many fonts are unavailable because they don't match the
current size---which is very strange, since @file{Xft} fonts are of
course scalable.  But the whole idea of requiring that the font match
the size is strange.  And the @samp{Options->Font Weights} menu is just
disabled, and has been for eons.

@item X resources
Currently in Stephen's patch there are @emph{four} treatments of font
resources.  There are the @samp{XEmacs.@var{face}.attributeFont}
resources used to set a single global font specification.  In the
widgets, some (still) have a @samp{font} resource using the automatic
@file{Xt} resource conversion to @samp{FontStruct}, some have separate
@samp{font} and @samp{xftFont} resources with the former automatically
converted to @samp{FontStruct} by @file{Xt} and the latter left as a
string, to be converted by @samp{XftParseName} later, and some have a
single @samp{font} resource which is converted to @samp{FontStruct} by
@file{Xt} or the latter left as a string, depending on whether
@file{Xft} was enabled by @samp{configure} or not.

Stephen thinks that all of these should be converted to use the face
approach, perhaps with some way to set specifications for individual
widgets, frames, or buffers.  This will require some careful design work
to incorporate face support in the widgets.  We should just accept any
or all of @samp{font}, @samp{fontSet}, and @samp{fontList} resources,
treat them all as lists of font names, either @samp{XLFD}- or
@file{fontconfig}-style, parse them ourselves (ie, not use the @file{Xt}
resource manager), and add them to font specifiers as appropriate.  But
this will require a bit of thought to obey POLA vis-a-vis usual @file{Xt}
conventions.

@item Rendering engine objects
With the introduction of the ``Xft patch,'' the X11, Macintosh, and MS
Windows platforms are all able to support multiple font rendering
engines in the same binary.  Generically, there are several tasks that
must be accomplished to render text on the display.  In both cases the
code is rather disorganized, with substantial cross-platform duplication
of similar routines.  While it may not be worthwhile to go the whole way
to @samp{RENDERER_HAS_METHOD} and @samp{MAYBE_RENDMETH}, refactoring
these modules around the notion of interfacing a ``generic rendering
engine interface'' to ``text'' seems like a plausible way to focus this
work.

Further evidence for this kind of approach is a bug recently fixed in
the @samp{xft-sjt} branch.  XEmacs was crashing because the Athena Label
widget tried to access a nonexistent font in its initialization
routine.  The font didn't exist because although no core X11 font
corresponding to the spec existed, an Xft font was found.  So the XEmacs
font instance existed but it did not specify an X11 core font, only the
Xft font.  When this object was used to initialize the font for the
Label widget, None (0) was passed to XtSetArgs, then XtCreateWidget was
called, and the internal initialization routine attempted to access that
(nonexistent) font while computing an X11 graphics context (GC).

A similar issue applies to colors, but there Xft colors keep the pixel
data internally, so (serendipitously) the X11 color (@emph{i.e.}, pixel)
member does get updated.

@item Colors, fonts, and faces
Besides the rendering engine itself, the XEmacs implementations of these
objects are poorly supported by current widget implementations,
including the traditional menubar and toolbar, as well as the more
recent button, tab control, and progress bar widgets.  The refactoring
suggested under ``Rendering engine objects'' should be conducted with an
eye to making these widgets support faces, perhaps even to the extent of
allowing rendering to X pixmaps (which some Athena widgets support,
although they will not support rendering via Xft directly). Especially
with @samp{XRender} technology this should not be horribly inefficient.

@item Specifiers, charsets, and languages
Traditionally Mule uses a rather rigid and low-level abstraction, the
@emph{charset}, to characterize font repertoires.  Unfortunately,
support for a given charset is generally neither necessary nor
sufficient to support a language.  Worse, although X11's only means for
indicating font repertoires is the font's @emph{registry}, the actual
repertoire of many fonts is either deficient or font-dependent.  The
only convenience is that the registry maps directly to a Mule charset in
most cases, and vice versa.

To date, XEmacs Mule has supported identification of appropriate fonts
to support a language's repertoire of characters by identifying the
repertoire as a subset of a union of charsets.  To each charset there is
a regular expression matching the registry portion of a font name.  Then
instantiation of a font proceeds by identifying the specifier domain,
and then walking down the list of specifications, matching the regexp
against font names until a match is found.  That font is requested from
the system, and if not found, the process continues similarly until a
font that can be loaded is found.

This has several problems.  First, there's no guarantee that the union
will be disjoint.  This problem manifests both in the case of display of
Unicode representations of text in the @samp{POSIX} default locale,
where glyphs are typically drawn from several inappropriate fonts.  A
similar problem often occurs, though for a different reason, in
multilingual messages composed using @file{Gnus}'s @samp{message-mode}
and MIME support.  This problem @emph{cannot} be avoided with the
current design; it is quite possible that a font desired in one context
will be shadowed by a font intended to get higher priority in a
semantically different but syntactically similar (as far as Mule can
tell) context.  (Of course, one could attach a different face as a text
property, but that requires programming support; it can't be done by
user configuration.)  The problem is only exacerbated as more and more
Unicode fonts, supporting large repertoires with substantial overlap
across fonts, are designed and published.

A second problem is that registry names are often inaccurate.  For
example, the Japanese JIS X 0208 standard was first published in 1978
(as a relabelling of an older standard).  It was then revised in 1983,
again in 1990, and once again in 2000, with slight changes to the
repertoire and mapping in each revision.  Technically, these standards
can be distinguished in properly named fonts as @samp{jisx0208.1978},
@samp{jisx0208.1983}, @samp{jisx0208.1990}, @samp{jisx0208.2000}, but
all of them are commonly simply labelled @samp{jisx0208}, and Western
distributors, of course, generally lack the expertise to correctly
relabel them.

A third problem is that you generally can't tell if there are ``holes''
in the repertoire until you try to display the glyph.

All of this tends to break standard idioms for handling Mule fonts in
@file{init} files because they depend on charsets being disjoint
repertoires.

The TrueType fonts (and the later OpenType standard) provides for a
proper character set query (as a Boolean vector indexed by Unicode code
points), as well as providing a list of supported languages.

I propose that we take advantage of these latter facilities by allowing
a font to be specified either as a string (a font name), or as a list
whose head is the font name and whose tail is a list of languages and
Mule charsets (for backward compatibility) that user intends to use the
font to display.  This will probably require a change to the specifier
code.

As mentioned above, specifiers will probably also have to be enhanced to
recognize @samp{widget} locales and domains, instead of the current hack
where special @samp{widget} and @samp{gui-element} faces are created.

@item Customize

Customize needs to deal with all this stuff!!
@end table


@node Better Rendering Support -- Current Status, Better Rendering Support -- Configuration with the Interim Patches, Better Rendering Support -- Implementation, Future Work -- Better Rendering Support
@subsection Better Rendering Support -- Current Status
@cindex better rendering support, current status
@cindex current status, better rendering support

Stephen has a branch containing his stuff in XEmacs CVS.  The branch
point tag is @samp{sjt-xft-bp}, roughly corresponding to XEmacs 21.5.18,
and branch tag is @samp{sjt-xft}.

@subsubsection Bugs Reported in sjt-xft

@table @code
@item ChangeLogs
A lot of these, especially for Eric and Matthias's work, are missing.
Mea culpa.

@item Options->Font
@itemx Options->Font Size
These menus don't work.  All fonts are greyed out.  All sizes are
available, but many (most?) faces don't change size, in particular,
@samp{default} does not.

@item Antialiased text bleeding outside of reported extent
On my PowerBook G4 Titanium 15" screen, X.org server v6.8.1,
  dimensions:    1280x833 pixels (433x282 millimeters),
  resolution:    75x75 dots per inch,
  depth of root window:    24 planes
(yes, those dimensions are broken),
with font "Bitstream Vera Sans Mono-16:dpi=75" antialiased text may
bleed out of the extent reported by XftTextExtents and other such
facilities.  This is most obvious with the underscore character in that
font.  The bottom of the underscore is antialiased, and insertions or
deletions in the same line before the underscore leave a series of
"phantom" underlines.  Except that it doesn't happen on the very first
such insertion or deletion after a window refresh.  A similar effect
sometimes occurs with deletions at the end of the line (no, I can't
define "sometimes").  See also comments in @file{redisplay-x.c},
functions @code{x_output_string} and @code{x_output_display_block}.
(Mostly duplicated here.)

I think this is probably an Xft bug, but I'm not sure.
@end table


@node Better Rendering Support -- Configuration with the Interim Patches, Better Rendering Support -- Modern Font Support, Better Rendering Support -- Current Status, Future Work -- Better Rendering Support
@subsection Better Rendering Support -- Configuration with the Interim Patches
@cindex better rendering support, configuration with the interim patches
@cindex configuration with the interim patches, better rendering support

For Stephen's @samp{sjt-xft} branch, you should keep the following in
mind when configuring:

@itemize
@item
Although the menus don't work, it is possible to specify fonts for
@emph{faces} using @code{set-face-font} (and other specifier-changing
functions).

There currently is no explicit way to specify that a particular font be
used only for a given language.  However, since many fonts support only
a limited repertoire such as ISO 8859/1, you can use the precedence of
specifications for a given specifier locale to get something of this
effect for non-Latin character sets.  This will normally work rather
poorly for multiple Latin character sets, however, because the
repertoires tend to have large amounts of overlap.  Support for
specifying font by @emph{language} as well as by character set is
planned.

Because fonts supporting other languages tend to support English as
well, if you want to use one font for English and another for the other
language, you must use the @code{append} method when adding font
specifications for the @emph{other} language.

However, this leaves you with a problem if you want to change the other
language's font: you have to remove the existing specification so it
won't shadow the new one when you append.

I use @code{define-specifier-tag} like this:

@example
(define-specifier-tag 'lang-ja)
;; No, I don't try to do real work with this font!  But it makes it
;; obvious that I got the requested font.  :-)
(set-face-font 'default "AirCut-14")
(set-face-font 'default "Kochi Mincho-14" nil '(lang-ja) 'append)
;; Oops, too sober.  Try something to match AirCut.
(set-face-font 'default "Mikachan-14"
               nil '(lang-ja) 'remove-tag-set-append)
@end example

@item
The only way to configure widget fonts at the present time is to use X
resources (or hack the source and rebuild).  Currently supported widgets
are
@itemize
@item
menubars
@item
tab controls
@end itemize

Here are the resources I use.  @strong{Warning:} @emph{This interface
will change.}  The tab control and menubar have separate Font and
XftFont resources, and use the X resource manager to instantiate a
FontStruct from the Font resource.  There is no converter facility for
XftFont yet, and creating one that handles both FontStruct and XftFont
depending on XEmacs's configuration and the font name seems error-prone
at best.  Probably we will should to a simple string representation for
this resource, and convert to a face in XEmacs rather than a font in
Xt/Xft.
@example
XEmacs*Tabs.xftFont: Bitstream Vera Sans-16
XEmacs*menubar*xftFont: Bitstream Vera Sans-16
XEmacs.modeline.attributeFont: Bitstream Charter-16
XEmacs.default.attributeFont: Bitstream Vera Sans Mono-16
@end example
I highly recommend use of a proportional font in the modeline because it
allows a lot more text to fit there.  (Previously the font sizes were
quite varied, and there was a comment that this weirdness gave good
balance.  This isn't true on my main platform, Mac OS X, and needs to be
rechecked on Linux, where it was observed.)
@end itemize



@node Better Rendering Support -- Modern Font Support, , Better Rendering Support -- Configuration with the Interim Patches, Future Work -- Better Rendering Support
@subsection Better Rendering Support -- Modern Font Support

@c Maybe eventually all these @cindexes should be spread about?
@cindex fonts
@cindex fonts, scalable
@cindex fonts, antialiased
@cindex fonts, TrueType
@cindex fonts, OpenType
@cindex fonts, Type1
@cindex TrueType fonts
@cindex OpenType fonts
@cindex Type1 fonts
@cindex antialiasing
@cindex Xft
@cindex fontconfig

@strong{NB: This subtree eventually needs to be moved to the Lispref.}

This chapter describes integration of the @file{Xft} font support
library into XEmacs.  This library is a layer over the separate
@file{FreeType} rendering engine and @file{fontconfig} font query and
selection libraries.  @file{FreeType} provides rendering facilities for
modern, good-looking TrueType fonts with hinting and antialiasing, while
@file{fontconfig} provides a coherent interface to font query and
selection which is independent of the rendering engine, although
currently it is only used in @file{Xft} to interface to @file{FreeType}.

From the user's point of view, @file{fontconfig} provides a naming
convention which is @emph{precise}, @emph{accurate}, and
@emph{convenient}.  Precision means that all properties available in the
programming API can be individually specified.  Accuracy means that the
truename of the font is exactly the list of all properties specified by
the font.  Thus, the anomolies that occur with XLFDs on many servers
(including modern Linux distributions with XFree86 or X.org servers)
cannot occur.  Convenience is subjective, of course.  However,
@file{fontconfig} provides a configuration system which (1) explicitly
specifies the defaults and substitutions that will be made in processing
user queries, and (2) allows the user to specify search configuration,
abbreviations, substitutions, and defaults that override the system's,
in the same format as used by system files.  Further, a @dfn{standard
minimal configuration} is defined that ensures that at least
@emph{serif}, @emph{sans-serif}, and @emph{monospace} fonts are
available on all @file{fontconfig} systems.

@menu
* Modern Font Support -- Font Concepts:: GUI devices, fonts, glyphs, rendering.
* Modern Font Support -- fontconfig::    Querying and selecting fonts.
* Modern Font Support -- Xft::           Rendering fonts on X11.
@end menu

@node Modern Font Support -- Font Concepts, Modern Font Support -- fontconfig, , Better Rendering Support -- Modern Font Support
@subsubsection Modern Font Support -- Font Concepts

In modern systems, displays are invariably @dfn{raster graphic devices},
which present an abstract interface of @dfn{pixel array} where each
@dfn{pixel value} is a color, and each pixel is individually mutable,
and (usually) readable.  In XEmacs, such devices are collectively called
@dfn{GUI devices}, as opposed to @dfn{TTY devices} which are character
stream devices but may support control sequences for setting the color
of individual characters, and the insertion position in a rectangular
array.  Here we are concerned only with control of GUI devices but use
TTY devices as a standard for comparison.

A @dfn{font} is an indexed collection of @dfn{glyphs}, which are
specifications of character shapes.  On a TTY device, these shapes are
entirely abstract, and the index is the identity function.  Typically
fonts are embedded in TTY devices, the user has no control over the font
from within the application, and where choice is available, there is
limited selection, and no extensibility.  Simple, functional, and
... ugly.

On GUI devices, the situation is different in every respect.  Glyphs may
be provided by the device, the application, or the user.  Additional
glyphs may be added at will at any of those levels.  Arbitrary index
functions allow the same glyph to be used to display characters in
different languages or using application-specific codes.  Glyphs have
concrete APIs, allowing fine control of rendering parameters, even
user-specified shapes.  To provide convenient, consistent handling of
collections of glyphs, we need a well-defined font API.

We can separate the necessary properties into two types: properties
which are common to all glyphs in the collection or a property of the
collection itself, and those which are glyph-specific.  Henceforth, the
former are called @dfn{font properties} and the latter @dfn{glyph
properties}.

Font properties include identification like the font @dfn{family},
font-wide design parameters like @dfn{slant} and @dfn{weight}, font
@dfn{metrics} like @dfn{size} (nominal height) and @dfn{average width}
used for approximate layout (such as sizing a popup dialog), and
properties like the @dfn{default glyph} that are associated with the
font for convenient use by APIs, but aren't really an intrinsic property
of the font as a collection of glyphs.  There may also be a @dfn{kerning
table} (used to improve spacing of adjacent glyphs).

Glyph properties include the @dfn{index}, glyph metrics such as
@dfn{ascent}, @dfn{descent}, @dfn{width}, @dfn{offset} (the offset to
the normal position of the next glyph), @dfn{italic correction} (used to
improve spacing when slanted and unslanted glyphs are juxtaposed).  Most
important, of course, is the glyph's shape, which is provided in a
format specific to a rendering engine.  Common formats include bitmaps
(X11 BDF), Postcript programs (Type 1), and collections of spline curves
(TrueType).  When the shape is not itself a bitmap, it must be
@dfn{rendered} to a pixmap, either a region on the display or a separate
object which is copied to the display.  In that case, the shape may
include ``multiple masters'' or ``hints'' to allow context-specific
rendering which improves the appearance of the glyph on the display.

Note that this use of ``glyph'' is mostly independent of the XEmacs LISP
glyph API.  @ref{Glyphs}.  It is possible to extract a single glyph from
a font and encapsulate it in Lisp_Glyph object, but the LISP glyph API
allows access to only a very few glyph properties, none of them related
to the rendering process.

XEmacs LISP does provide an API for selecting and querying fonts, in the
form of a fairly complete set of wrappers for @file{fontconfig}
(@pxref{Modern Font Support -- fontconfig}).  It also provides some
control of rendering of text via wrappers for @file{Xft} APIs
(@pxref{Modern Font Support -- Xft}), but this API is quite incomplete.
Also, since the font selection and query facilities of @file{Xft} are
provided by @file{fontconfig}, there is some confusion in the API.  For
example, use of antialiasing to improve the appearance of rendered
glyphs can be enabled or disabled.  The API for this is to set the
@file{fontconfig} font property @code{antialias} on the font.  However,
from the point of view of @file{fontconfig} this is merely a hint that
the rendering engine may or may not respect.  This property cannot be
used to select only fonts suitable for being antialiased, for example.
And @code{rgba} (subpixel geometry) and @code{dpi} (pixel density) are
conceptually properties of the display, not of either the font.  They
function as hints to the rendering process.

As a final confusing touch, @file{Xft} also provides some access to the
@file{XRender} extension provided by some modern X servers.  This is
mostly limited to colors, but rectangle APIs are also provided.  These
are (of course) completely independent of fonts, but @file{Xft} is
designed for client-side font rendering, and thus uses the
@file{XRender} extension heavily.


@node Modern Font Support -- fontconfig, Modern Font Support -- Xft, Modern Font Support -- Font Concepts, Better Rendering Support -- Modern Font Support
@subsubsection Modern Font Support -- fontconfig

@cindex fontconfig API
@cindex API, fontconfig
@cindex fonts, configuring
@cindex configuring fonts
@cindex fonts, selecting
@cindex selecting fonts
@cindex fonts, querying
@cindex querying fonts

@emph{Implementation notes}: The functions which initialize the library
and handle memory management (@emph{e.g.}, @code{FcInit} and
@code{FcPatternDestroy}) are intentionally not wrapped (in the latter
case, @code{fc-pattern-destroy} was provided, but this was
ill-considered and will be removed; LISP code should @strong{never} call
this function).  Thinking about some of the auxiliary constructs used by
@file{fontconfig} is in transition.  The @code{FcObjectSet} API has been
internalized; it is exposed to LISP as a list of strings.  The
@code{FcFontSet} API is still in use, but it also will be internalized,
probably as a list (alternatively, vector) of @code{Lisp_fc_pattern}
objects.  Changing the representation of @file{fontconfig} objects
(property names) from LISP strings to keywords is under consideration.

If @file{Xft} (including @file{fontconfig}) support is integrated into
the XEmacs build, XEmacs provides the symbol @code{xft} at
initialization.

XEmacs provides the following functions wrapping the @file{fontconfig}
library API.

@defun fc-fontset-p object

Returns t if @var{object} is of type fc-fontset, nil otherwise.
@emph{This API is likely to be removed in the near future.}
@end defun

@defun fc-fontset-count fcfontset

Counts the number of fc pattern objects stored in the fc fontset object
@var{fcfontset}.  @emph{This API is likely to be removed in the near
future.}
@end defun

@defun fc-fontset-ref fcfontset i

Return the fc pattern object at index @var{i} in fc fontset object
@var{fcfontset}.  Return nil if the index exceeds the bounds of
@var{fcfontset}.  @emph{This API is likely to be removed in the near
future.}
@end defun

@defun fc-fontset-destroy fcfontset

Explicitly deallocate @var{fcfontset}.  @emph{Do not call this function
from LISP code.  You will crash.  This API will be removed in the near
future.}
@end defun

@defun fc-pattern-p object

Returns t if @var{object} is of type fc-pattern, nil otherwise.
@end defun

@defun fc-pattern-create

Return a fresh and empty fc-pattern object.
@end defun

@defun fc-name-parse name

Parse string @var{name} as a fontconfig font name and return its
representation as a fc pattern object.
@end defun

@defun fc-name-unparse pattern

Unparse pattern object @var{pattern} to a string.
@end defun

@file{Xft}'s similar function is actually a different API.  We provide
both for now.  (They probably invoke the same code from
@file{fontconfig} internally, but the @file{fontconfig} implementation
is more conveniently called from C.)

@defun xft-name-unparse pattern

Unparse pattern object @var{pattern} to a string (using the @file{Xft}
API).
@end defun
  
@defun fc-pattern-duplicate pattern

Make a copy of pattern object @var{pattern} and return it.
@end defun

@defun fc-pattern-add pattern property value

Add attributes to the pattern object @var{pattern}.  @var{property} is a
string naming the attribute to add, @var{value} the value for this attribute.

@var{value} may be a string, integer, float, or symbol, in which case
the value will be added as an FcChar8[], int, double, or FcBool
respectively.
@end defun

@defun fc-pattern-del pattern, property

Remove attribute @var{property} from pattern object @var{pattern}.
@end defun

This is the generic interface to @code{FcPatternGet}.
We don't support the losing symbol-for-property interface.  However, it
might be a very good idea to use keywords for property names in LISP.

@defun fc-pattern-get pattern property &optional id type

From @var{pattern}, extract @var{property} for the @var{id}'th member, of
type @var{type}.

@var{pattern} is an @file{Xft} (@file{fontconfig}) pattern object.
@var{property} is a string naming a @file{fontconfig} font property.
Optional @var{id} is a nonnegative integer indexing the list of values
for @var{property} stored in @var{pattern}, defaulting to 0 (the first
value).
Optional @var{type} is a symbol, one of 'string, 'boolean, 'integer, 'float,
'double, 'matrix, 'charset, or 'void, corresponding to the FcValue types.
('float is an alias for 'double).

Symbols with names of the form @samp{fc-result-@var{DESCRIPTION}} are
returned when the desired value is not available.  These are

@example
fc-result-type-mismatch   the value found has an unexpected type
fc-result-no-match        there is no such attribute
fc-result-no-id           there is no value for the requested ID
@end example
@end defun

The Lisp types returned will conform to @var{type}:

@example
string          string
boolean         `t' or `nil'
integer         integer
double (float)  float
matrix          not implemented
charset         not implemented
void            not implemented
@end example

The types of the following standard properties are predefined by
fontconfig.  The symbol 'fc-result-type-mismatch will be returned if the
object exists but @var{type} does not match the predefined type.  It is
best not to specify a type for predefined properties, as a mistake here
ensures error returns on the correct type.

Each standard property has a convenience accessor defined in
@file{fontconfig.el}, named in the form
@samp{fc-pattern-get-@var{property}}.  The convenience functions are
preferred to @code{fc-pattern-get} since a typo in the string naming a
property will result in a silent null return, while a typo in a function
name will usually result in a compiler or runtime \"not fboundp\" error.
You may use @code{defsubst} to define convenience functions for non-standard
properties.

@example
family         String  Font family name 
style          String  Font style. Overrides weight and slant 
slant          Int     Italic, oblique or roman 
weight         Int     Light, medium, demibold, bold or black 
size           Double  Point size 
aspect         Double  Stretches glyphs horizontally before hinting 
pixelsize      Double  Pixel size 
spacing        Int     Proportional, monospace or charcell 
foundry        String  Font foundry name 
antialias      Bool    Whether glyphs can be antialiased 
hinting        Bool    Whether the rasterizer should use hinting 
verticallayout Bool    Use vertical layout 
autohint       Bool    Use autohinter instead of normal hinter 
globaladvance  Bool    Use font global advance data 
file           String  The filename holding the font 
index          Int     The index of the font within the file 
ftface         FT_Face Use the specified FreeType face object 
rasterizer     String  Which rasterizer is in use 
outline        Bool    Whether the glyphs are outlines 
scalable       Bool    Whether glyphs can be scaled 
scale          Double  Scale factor for point->pixel conversions 
dpi            Double  Target dots per inch 
rgba           Int     unknown, rgb, bgr, vrgb, vbgr, none - subpixel geometry 
minspace       Bool    Eliminate leading from line spacing 
charset        CharSet Unicode chars encoded by the font 
lang           String  List of RFC-3066-style languages this font supports
@end example

The FT_Face, Matrix, CharSet types are unimplemented, so the corresponding
properties are not accessible from Lisp at this time.  If the value of a
property returned has type FT_Face, FcCharSet, or FcMatrix,
@code{fc-result-type-mismatch} is returned.

The following properties which were standard in @file{Xft} v.1 are
obsolete in @file{Xft} v.2: @code{encoding}, @code{charwidth},
@code{charheight}, @code{core}, and @code{render}.

@defun fc-pattern-destroy pattern

Explicitly deallocate pattern object @var{pattern}.  @emph{Do not call
this function from LISP code.  You will crash.  This API will be removed
in the near future.}
@end defun

@defun fc-font-match device pattern

Return the font on @var{device} that most closely matches @var{pattern}.

@var{pattern} is a @file{fontconfig} pattern object.  @var{device} is an
X11 device.  Returns a @file{fontconfig} pattern object representing the
closest match to the given pattern, or an error code.  Possible error
codes are @code{fc-result-no-match} and @code{fc-result-no-id}.
@end defun
     
@defun fc-list-fonts-pattern-objects device pattern properties

List the fonts on @var{device} that match @var{pattern} for
@var{properties}.  @var{device} is an X11 device.  @var{pattern} is a
@file{fontconfig} pattern to be matched.  @var{properties} is the list of
property names (strings) that should be included in each returned
pattern.  The result is a @file{fontconfig} fontset object containing
the set of unique matching patterns.
@end defun

The @var{properties} argument does not affect the matching.  So, for
example,

@example
(mapcar #'fc-name-unparse
  (let ((xfl (fc-list-fonts-pattern-objects nil
              (fc-name-parse "FreeMono") '("style")))
        (i 0)
        (fl nil))
    (while (< i (fc-fontset-count xfl))
      (push (fc-fontset-ref xfl i) fl)
      (setq i (1+ i)))
    fl))
@end example

will return something like
@samp{(":style=Bold" ":style=Medium" ":style=Oblique" ":style=BoldOblique")}
if you have the FreeFont package installed.  Note that the sets of
objects in the target pattern and the returned patterns don't even
intersect.

In using @code{fc-list-fonts-pattern-objects}, be careful that only
intrinsic properties of fonts be included in the pattern.  Those
properties included in the pattern must be matched, or the candidate
font will be eliminated from the list.  When a font leaves a property
unspecified, it is considered to be a mismatch for any pattern with that
property specified.  Thus, inclusion of extraneous properties will
result in the list being empty.  Note that for scalable fonts (at
least), @code{size} is not an intrinsic property!  Thus a specification
such as @code{"Bitstream Vera Sans-12"} will return an empty list
regardless of whether the font is available or not---probably not what
you (as programmer or user) want.

The list is unsorted.  In particular, the pattern
@code{":style=italic,oblique"} will not return italic fonts first, then
oblique ones.  The fonts will be returned in some arbitrary order.

@emph{Implementation notes}:  Fontset objects are slated for removal
from the API.  In the future @code{fc-list-fonts-pattern-objects} will 
return a list.  The @var{device} argument is unused, ignored, and may be
removed if it's not needed to match other font-listing APIs.  This name
will be changed to correspond to Ben's new nomenclature, probably simply
@code{fc-font-list}.

@defun fc-font-sort device pattern trim

Return a fontset object listing all fonts sorted by proximity to
@var{pattern}.  @var{device} is an X11 device.  @var{pattern} is a
fontconfig pattern to be matched.  Optional argument @var{trim}, if
non-nil, means to trim trailing fonts that do not contribute new
characters to the union repertoire.
@end defun

@emph{Implementation notes}:  Fontset objects are slated for removal
from the API.  In the future @code{fc-font-sort} will return a list (or
perhaps a vector) of FcPatterns.  The @var{device} argument is unused,
ignored, and may be removed if it's not needed to match other
font-listing APIs.

@defun fc-font-real-pattern fontname xdevice

Temporarily open font @var{fontname} (a string) on device @var{xdevice}
and return the actual fc pattern matched by the Fc library.  @emph{This
function doesn't make much sense and will be removed from the API.}
@end defun

@defun xlfd-font-name-p fontname

Check whether string @var{fontname} is a XLFD font name.
@end defun

@defvar xft-debug-level

Level of debugging messages to issue to stderr for @var{Xft}.
A nonnegative integer.  Set to 0 to suppress all warnings.
Default is 1 to ensure a minimum of debugging output at initialization.
Higher levels give more information.
@end defvar

@defvar xft-version

The major version number of the Xft library compiled with.
@end defvar

@defvar xft-xlfd-font-regexp

Regular expression matching XLFD font names.
@end defvar



@node Modern Font Support -- Xft, , Modern Font Support -- fontconfig, Better Rendering Support -- Modern Font Support
@subsubsection Modern Font Support -- fontconfig

IIRC, we don't really provide any @file{Xft} APIs at the LISP level yet.





@node Future Work Discussion, Old Future Work, Future Work, Top
@chapter Future Work Discussion
@cindex future work, discussion
@cindex discussion, future work

This chapter includes (mostly) email discussions about particular design
issues, edited to include only relevant and useful stuff.  Ideally over
time these could be condensed down to a single design document to go
into the normal Future Work section.

@menu
* Discussion -- Garbage Collection::  
* Discussion -- Glyphs::        
* Discussion -- Dialog Boxes::  
* Discussion -- Multilingual Issues::  
* Discussion -- Instantiators and Generic Property Accessors::  
* Discussion -- Switching to C++::  
* Discussion -- Windows External Widget::  
* Discussion -- Packages::      
* Discussion -- Distribution Layout::  
@end menu

@node Discussion -- Garbage Collection, Discussion -- Glyphs, Future Work Discussion, Future Work Discussion
@section Discussion -- Garbage Collection
@cindex discussion, garbage collection
@cindex garbage collection, discussion

@menu
* Discussion -- Pure Space::    
* Discussion -- Hashtable-Based Marking and Cleanup::  
* Discussion -- The Anti-Cons::  
@end menu

@node Discussion -- Pure Space, Discussion -- Hashtable-Based Marking and Cleanup, Discussion -- Garbage Collection, Discussion -- Garbage Collection
@subsection Discussion -- Pure Space
@cindex discussion, pure space
@cindex pure space, discussion

On Tue, Oct 12, 1999 at 03:36:59AM -0700, Ben Wing wrote:

So what am I missing here?

In response, Olivier Galibert wrote:

Two things:
@enumerate
@item
The purespace is gone

I  mean  absolutely, completely and utterly  removed.   Fpurecopy is a
no-op now (and  have been for  some time).  Readonly objects  are gone
too.  Having  less checks to  do in Fsetcar,  Fsetcdr,  Faset and some
others  is probably a  good thing, speedwise.  I  have it removed some
time ago because it  does not make  sense when using a portable dumper
to copy data in a special area of the memory at dump time and I wanted
to be  sure that supressing the copying  from Fpurecopy wouldn't break
things.

Now, we want to get the post-dumping data sharing back, of course.  In
today systems,  it is  quite   easy: you just   have  to map the  file
MAP_PRIVATE and avoid writing to the subset of  pages you want to keep
shared.   Copy-on-write does  the job for  you.  It  has the nice side
effect of  completely avoiding bus  errors due  to trying to  write to
readonly memory zones.

Avoiding writing to the "pure" objects themselves  is already done, of
course.  Would lisp code  have written to the  purecopied parts of the
dumped data that it would have exploded long ago.  So there is nothing
to do in this area.  So the only remaining thing is  the markbit.  Two
possible strategies:

@itemize @bullet
@item
have Fpurecopy mark somehow the lrecords it would have copied in the
good old times.  Post-dump, use this mark as a "always marked, don't
touch, don't look  into, don't free"  flag, the  same way CHECK_PURE
was used.
@item
move the markbit outside of the lrecord.
@end itemize

The second solution is more appealing to me for a bunch of reasons:
@itemize @bullet
@item
more things are shared  than only what  is purecopied (not yet  used
functions come to mind)
@item
no more "the only references to this  non-purecopied object are from
purecopied objects, XEmacs will self-destruct  in ten seconds"  kind
of bugs.
@item
removing flags  goes   the right   way towards   implementing  Jan's
allocator ideas.
@item
it becomes probably easier to experiment with the GC code
@end itemize

@item
Finding all the dumped objects in order to unmark them sucks

Not  having to rebuild  a list of all the  dumped objects  in order to
find  them all and ensure that  all are unmarked simplifies things for
me.  Errr, ok, now that I really think of  it, I can rebuild this list
easily, in fact.  And I'm probably going to have to manage it, since I
feel like the  lack of calls to  the finalizers for the dumped objects
is going to someday  turn over and bite me  in the face.  But anyways,
it makes my life easier for now.

So no,  it's  not a _necessity_.   But  it  helps.  And the  automatic
sharing of  all objects until  you write  to   them explicitely is,  I
think, really cool.
@end enumerate

@node Discussion -- Hashtable-Based Marking and Cleanup, Discussion -- The Anti-Cons, Discussion -- Pure Space, Discussion -- Garbage Collection
@subsection Discussion -- Hashtable-Based Marking and Cleanup
@cindex discussion, hashtable-based marking and cleanup
@cindex hashtable-based marking and cleanup, discussion

On 10/12/1999 5:49 PM Ben Wing wrote:

OK, I can see the advantages.  But:

@enumerate
@item
There will be an inevitable loss of speed using a large hashtable.  If
it's large, I say that it's just not worth it.  There are things that are
so much more important than futzing around with the garbage collector
(e.g. fixing the god damn user interface), things which if not fixed will
sooner or later cause XEmacs to die entirely.  If we are causing a major
slowdown in the name of some not-so-important work that may or may not get
done, we shouldn't do it.  (On the other hand, if the slowdown is
negligible, I have no problems with this.)

@item
I think you should @strong{expand} the concept of read-only objects so
that @strong{any} object (especially strings and cons cells) can get
marked read-only by the C code if it wants. (Perhaps you could use the
now-unused mark bit to hold a read-only flag.) This is important because
it allows C code to directly return internal lists (e.g. from the
specifiers and various object property lists) without having to do a
copy, like is now done (and similarly, potentially to directly accept
lists from a Lisp call without copying them for internal use, if the
Lisp caller is made aware that the list might become read-only) -- if
the copy weren't done and some piece of Lisp code went and modified the
list, XEmacs might very well crash.  Thus, this read-only flag would be
a huge efficiency gain in terms of the garbage collection overhead saved
as well as the speed of copying a large list.  The extra checks in
@code{Fsetcar()}, etc. for this that you mention are in fact negligible
in their speed overhead -- one or two instructions -- and these
functions are not used all that commonly, either.  With the changes I
have proposed in Architecting XEmacs, the case of returning an internal
list will become more and more common as the power of the user interface
would be greatly increased and along with it are lots and lots of lists
of info that need to be retrievable from Lisp.
@end enumerate

BTW there is a wonderful book all about garbage collection by Jones and
Lins.  Ever seen it?

@example
http://www.amazon.com/exec/obidos/ASIN/0471941484/qid=939775572/sr=1-1/002-3092633-2509405
@end example

@node Discussion -- The Anti-Cons,  , Discussion -- Hashtable-Based Marking and Cleanup, Discussion -- Garbage Collection
@subsection Discussion -- The Anti-Cons
@cindex discussion, the anti-cons
@cindex the anti-cons, discussion

From: "Ben Wing" <ben@@666.com> 
Date: Tue, 14 May 2002 06:48:09 -0700 

i was thinking about the proliferating types of weak hash tables --
e.g. now we have "key-car-value weak" hash tables due to a need in the
glyphs code.  i realized there should be a general solution, that lets
you control exactly how the weakness of such hash tables work.
 
and, assuming we implement a simple "reference" type, a simple
container whose object is a weak reference and thus gets converted to
nil (and a flag set on the reference) when the object is collected, it
would be useful for more precisely controlling the reference, too.
 
it's called an "anti-cons".  it behaves somewhat like a cons in that
it boxes two items, but its marking properties are very different --
in fact, backwards.  normally, a cons, if marked, marks its children.
in this case, if the children of an anti-cons are marked, it marks
itself!  you'd need a few different kinds of anti-cons -- probably the
following:
 
@example
and [marks itself if both children marked]
or [...]
left [marks itself if left is marked, and then marks the right]
right [...]
not-left
not-right
@end example
 
by putting such an object inside of a weak reference -- e.g. in a weak
hash table -- we can set up a tree of arbitrary complexity which
implements any boolean formula of markedness over any number of
objects.  this would easily handle key-car, and key-cadr, and
key-car-or-cdr, and key-((caar or cadr) and cdr) etc. etc.
 
implementing this in the current xemacs framework is mostly trivial.
 
michael, would such an object get in the way of your new gc?

From: sperber@@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de (Michael Sperber [Mr. Preprocessor]) 
Date: Tue, 14 May 2002 16:04:01 +0200 

You might want to look at 

http://research.microsoft.com/Users/simonpj/Papers/weak.htm

for a pretty comprehensive survey of what you could want in terms of
weakness.  Its weak pointers are very similar to your anti-cons.
However, there are some problems in doing the same in a Lisp settings,
mainly because of symbols.  I intend to elaborate on this next week;
this week is full, unfortunately.

Ben> implementing this in the current xemacs framework is mostly
Ben> trivial.

Ben> michael, would such an object get in the way of your new gc?

Well, our first commit will be an implementation of vanilla weak
boxes (ready within the next few days, I hope), and we'll then try to
replace most other instances of weakness with uses of those.  We'll
then try to find a more general solution for the rest.  (Richard
Reingruber has already done a comprehensive survey of the trouble
spot.

Can you wait until next week?  I'll try to come up with a battle plan
then.

From: sperber@@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de (Michael Sperber [Mr. Preprocessor]) 
Date: Tue, 28 May 2002 16:14:20 +0200 

We've now started implementing ephemerons as a building block for the
more involved weakness-involving data structures:

The relevant reference is

Barry Hayes. Ephemerons: A New Finalization Mechanism.
OOPSLA 1997. 176--183

The idea is this:

an ephemeron consists of a key and a value.  Through the ephemeron,
the key is not reachable.  The value is only reachable if both the
ephemeron is reachable and the key is reachable.  If the ephemeron is
reachable and the key becomes unreachable, the value slot of the
ephemeron will be tombstoned, i.e. overwritten with NIL or something.

This allows implementing, AFAICS, the other data structures involving
weakness, such as weak hash tables and their various mutants.

We're also planning to come up with a more comprehensive solution for
finalization, but some design snags remain to be worked out.

@node Discussion -- Glyphs, Discussion -- Dialog Boxes, Discussion -- Garbage Collection, Future Work Discussion
@section Discussion -- Glyphs
@cindex discussion, glyphs
@cindex glyphs, discussion

Some comments (not always pretty!) by Ben:

March 20, 2000

Andy, I use the tab widgets but I've been having lots of problems.

1] Sometimes clicking on them does nothing.

2] There's a design flaw: I frequently use M-C-l to switch to the
previous buffer.  If I use this in conjunction with the tabs, things get
all screwed up because selecting a buffer with the tab does not bring it
to the front of the buffer list, like it should.  It looks like you're
doing this to avoid having the order of the tabs change, but this is
wrong: If you don't reorder the buffer list, everything else gets
screwed up.  If you want the order of the tabs not to change, you need
to decouple this order from the buffer list order.

March 23, 2000

I'm very confused.  The SIGIO timer is used @strong{only} for C-g.  It has
nothing to do with any other events.  (sit-for 0) ought to

(1) cause all pending non-command events to get executed, and
(b) do redisplay

However, sit-for gets preempted by input coming in.

What about (sit-for 0.1)?

I suppose a solution along the lines of dispatch-non-command-events
might be OK if you've tried everything else and it doesn't work, but i'm
leery of introducing new Lisp functions to deal with specific problems.
Pretty soon we end up with a whole bevy of such ill-defined functions,
like we already have.  I think instead, you should introduce the
following primitive:

@example
(wait-for-event redisplay &rest event-specs)
@end example

Waits for one of the event specifications specified to happen.  Returns
something about what happened.

REDISPLAY controls the behavior of redisplay during waiting.  Something
like

@itemize @bullet
@item
nil (never redisplay),
@item
t (redisplay when it seems appropriate), etc.
@end itemize

EVENT-SPECS could be

@example
t                     -- drain all non-user events, and then return
any-process           -- wait till input or state change on any process
process               -- wait till input or state change on process
time                  -- wait till such-and-such time has elapsed
'user                 -- wait till user event has happened
'(user predicate)     -- wait till user event matching the predicate has
                         happened
'event                -- wait till any event has happened
'(event predicate)    -- wait till event matching the predicate has happened
@end example

The existing functions @code{next-event}, @code{next-command-event},
@code{accept-process-output}, @code{sit-for}, @code{sleep-for}, etc. could all be
written in terms of this new command.  You could use this command inside
of your glyph code to ensure that the events get processed that need do
in order for widget updates to happen.

But you said something about need a magic event to invoke redisplay?
Why is that?

April 2, 2000

the internal distinction between "widget" and "layout" is bogus.  there
exist widgets that do drawing and do layout of their children,
e.g. group-box widgets and proper tab widgets.  the only sensible
distinction is between widgets with children and those without children.

April 5, 2000

andy, i'm not sure i really believe that you need to cycle the event
code to get widgets to redisplay, but in any case you should

@enumerate
@item
hide the logic to do this in the c code; the lisp code should do
nothing other than call (redisplay widget)

@item
make sure your event-cycling code processes @strong{NO} events at all.  this
includes non-user events.  queue the events instead.
@end enumerate

in other words, dispatch-non-command-events must go, and i am proposing
a general function (redisplay OBJECT) to replace the existing ad-hoc
functions.

April 6, 2000

the tab widget code should simply be able to create a whole lot of tabs
without regard to the size of the gutter, and the surrounding layout
widget (please please make layouts be proper widgets!) should
automatically map and unmap them as necessary, to fill up the available
space.  perhaps this already works and what you're doing is just for
optimization?  but i get the feeling this is not the case.

April 6, 2000

the function make-gutter-only-dialog-frame is bogus.  the use of the
gutter here to hold widgets is an implementation detail and should not
be exposed in the interface.  similarly, make-search-dialog should not
have to do all the futzing that it does.  creating the frame unmapped,
creating an extent and messing with the gutter: all this stuff should be
hidden.  you should have a simple function make-dialog-frame that takes
a dialog specification, and that's all you need to do.

also, these dialog boxes, and this function make-dialog-frame, should

@enumerate
@item
be in @file{dialog.el}, not gutter-items.el.
@item
when possible, be placed in the interactive spec of standard lisp
functions rather than accessed directly from @file{menubar-items.el}
@item
wrapped in calls to should-use-dialog-box-p, so the user has control
over when dialog boxes appear.
@end enumerate

April 7, 2000

hmmm ...  in that case, the whitespace absolutely needs to be specified
as properties of the layout widget (e.g. :border-width and
:border-height), rather than setting an overall size.  you have no idea
what the correct size should be if the user changes font size or uses
translations in a different language.

Your modus operandi should be "hardcoded pixel sizes are @strong{always} bad."

April 7, 2000

you mean the number of tabs adjusts, or the size of each tab adjusts (by
making the font smaller or something)?  if the size of a single tab is
not related to the total space the tabs can fix into, then it should be
possible to simply specify as many tabs as exist for buffers, and have
the layout manager decide how many can fit into the available space.
this does @strong{not} mean the layout manager will resize the tabs, because
query-geometry on the tabs should find out that the tabs don't want to
be any size other than they are.

the point here is that you should not @strong{have} to worry about pixel
heights and widths @strong{anywhere} in Lisp-level code.  The layout managers
should take care of everything for you.  The only exceptions may be in
some text fields, which will be blank by default and you want to specify
a maximum width (which should be done in 'n' sizes, not in pixels!).

i won't stop complaining until i see nearly every one of those
pixel-width and pixel-height parameters gone, and the remaining ones
there for a very, very good reason.

April 7, 2000

Andy Piper wrote:

@example
> At 03:51 PM 4/6/00 -0700, Ben Wing wrote:
> >[the function make-gutter-only-dialog-frame is bogus]
>
> The problem is that some of the callbacks and such need access to the
> @strong{created} frame, so you end up in a catch 22 unless you do what I've done.
@end example

[Ben proposes other ways to avoid exposing all the guts, as in
@code{make-gutter-only-dialog-frame}:]

@enumerate
@item
Instead of passing in the actual glyph spec or glyph, pass in a
function of two args (the dialog frame and its parents), which when
called, creates and returns the appropriate glyph.

@item
[Better] Provide a way for callbacks to determine where they were
invoked at.  This is much more general and is what you should really
do.  For example, have the code that calls the callbacks bind some
global variables such as widget-callback-current-glyph and
widget-callback-current-channel, which contain the glyph whose
callback is being invoked, and the window or frame of the glyph
(depending on where the glyph is) where the invocation actually
happened.  That way, the callbacks can easily figure out the dialog
box and its parent, and not have to worry about embedding it in at
creation time.
@end enumerate

April 15, 2000
I don't understand when you say "the various types of callback".  Are
you using the callback for various different purposes?

Your widget callbacks should work just like any other callback: they
take two arguments, one indicating the object to which the callback was
attached (an image instance, i think), and the event that caused the
callback to be invoked.

April 17, 2000

I am completely vetoing widget-callback-current-channel.  How about you
create a new keyword, :new-callback, that is a function of two args,
like i specified before.

btw if you really are calling your callback using call-interactively,
why don't you declare a function (interactive "e") and then call
event-channel on the resulting event?  that should get you the same
result as widget-callback-current-channel.

the problem with this and everything you've proposed is that there's no
way, of course, to get at the actual widget that you were invoked from.
would you propose adding widget-callback-current-widget?

@node Discussion -- Dialog Boxes, Discussion -- Multilingual Issues, Discussion -- Glyphs, Future Work Discussion
@section Discussion -- Dialog Boxes
@cindex discussion, dialog boxes
@cindex dialog boxes, discussion

@example
From: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
                                                      10/7/1999 5:57 PM

 Subject:
        Re: Animated gif patch (2)
     To: 
        Andy Piper <andy@@xemacs.org>
    CC: 
        xemacs-review@@xemacs.org, xemacs-beta@@xemacs.org




The distinction between layouts and widgets makes no sense, so you should combine
the different data required.  Consider a grouping widget.  Is this a layout or a
widget?  It draws, like a widget, but has children, like a layout.  Same for a tab
widget, properly implemented.  It draws, handles input, has children, and makes
choices about how to lay them out.

ben

From: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
                                                       9/7/1999 8:50 PM

 Subject:
        Re: Layouts done
     To: 
        Andy Piper <andyp@@beasys.com>




this sounds great!  where can i see the code?

as for user-defined layouts, you must certainly have some sort of abstraction
layer for layouts, with DEFINE_LAYOUT_TYPE or something similar just like device
types and such.  If not, you should certainly make one ...  it would have methods
such as query-geometry and do-layout.  It should be easy to create a user-defined
layout if you have such an abstraction.

with a user-defined layout, complex built-in layouts such as grid should not be
necessary because it's so easy to write snippets of lisp.

as for the "redisplay too much" problem, perhaps you could put a dirty flag in
each glyph indicating whether it needs to be redisplayed, recalculated, etc.?

Andy Piper wrote:

> You may want to check them out. I haven't done the user-defined layout
> callback - I'm not sure what sort of API this could have.  Keywords I've done:
>
> :orientation - vertical or horizontal
> :justify - left, center or right
> :border - etch-in, etch-out, bevel-in, bevel -out or text (which gives you
> etch-in with a title)
>
> You can embed any glyph type in a layout.
>
> There is probably room for improvements for justify to do grid-type layouts
> as per java.
>
> The only annoying thing is that I've hacked up font-lock support to do a
> progress gauge in the gutter area. I've used a layout to set things out
> correctly. The problem is if you change one of the sub-widgets, the whole
> layout gets redisplayed because it is treated as a single glyph by redisplay.
>
> Oh, and I've done line based scrolling so that glyphs scroll off the page
> in units of the average display line height rather than the whole line at
> once. This could easily be converted to pixel scrolling but would be very
> slow I fear.
>
> andy
> --------------------------------------------------------------
> Dr Andy Piper
> Senior Consultant Architect, BEA Systems Ltd




From: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
                                                     8/10/1999 11:11 PM

 Subject:
        Re: Widgets
     To: 
        Andy Piper <andy@@xemacs.org>




I think you might have misinterpreted what i meant.  I meant to say that XEmacs should
implement the @strong{concept} of a hierarchy of nested child "widgets" or "gui items" or
whatever we want to call them -- this includes container "widgets" such as grouping
widgets (which draw a border around the children, like in Windows), tab widgets, simple
layout widgets (invisible, but lay out their children appropriately), etc, plus leaf
"widgets" (buttons, sliders, etc., also standard Emacs windows).  The layout calculations
for these widgets would be handled entirely by XEmacs in a window-system-independent way.
There is no need to create a corresponding hierarchy of window-system
widgets/controls/whatever if it's not required, and certainly no need to try to use the
window-system-supplied geometry management routines.  It's absolutely necessary to support
this nesting concept in XEmacs, however, or it's impossible to have easily-designable
dialog boxes.  On the other hand, I think it @strong{is} required to create much of this
hierarchy within the actual window system, at the very least for non-invisible container
widgets (tab, grouping, etc.), otherwise we will have very bogus, non-native-looking
containers like your current tab-widget implementation.  It's critical for XEmacs to be
able to create dialog boxes in Windows or Motif that look just like those in any other
standard application.  Otherwise people will continue to think that XEmacs is a
backwards-looking, badly implemented piece of software, which in many ways it is,
particularly in regards to its user interface.

Perhaps we should talk on the phone?  This typing is quite hard for me still.  What hours
are you at work?  My hours are approx. 2pm - 2am Pacific time (GMT - 7 hours currently).

ben


From: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
                                                     7/21/1999 2:44 AM

 Subject:
        Re: Tabs 'n widgets screenshot
     To: 
        Andy Piper <andy@@xemacs.org>
    CC: 
        xemacs-beta@@xemacs.org, wmperry@@aventail.com




This is real cool, but looking at this, it's clear that it doesn't look the
way tab widgets are supposed to work.  In particular, of course, they should
have the proper borders around the stuff displayed.  I've attached a screen
shot of a typical Windows dialog box with a tab widget in it.  The problem
lies with this "expanded gutter" concept.  Tabs are @strong{NOT} extra graphical junk
placed in the gutters of a buffer but are GUI objects with @strong{children} inside
of them.  This is the right way to do things, and you would need no extra
gutter functionality at all for this.  You just need to implement the concept
of GUI objects containing other GUI objects within them.  One such GUI object
needs to be a "Emacs-text" GUI object, which is an Emacs window and contains a
buffer within it.  At this level, you need not be concerned with the
complexities of geometry layout.  The only change that needs to be made in the
overall strategy of frames, windows, etc. is that windows need not be exactly
contiguous and tiled, as long as they are contained within a frame.  Or more
specifically: Given that you could always split a window contained inside a
GUI object, we just need to expand things so that each frame has @strong{multiple}
hierarchies of windows in it, rather than just one.  A hierarchy of windows
can nest inside of another window -- e.g. I put a tab widget or a text widget
inside of a buffer.  This should be easy to implement -- just change things so
there are multiple hierarchies of windows where there are one, each (except
the top-level one) being rooted inside some other window.

Anyone willing to implement this? Andy?


From: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
                                                      6/30/1999 3:30 PM

 Subject:
        Re: Focus Help!
     To: 
        Andy Piper <andy@@xemacs.org>
    CC: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@xemacs.org>, martin@@xemacs.org, andyp@@beasys.com




It sounds like you're doing very good work.  It also sounds like the approach
you have followed is the correct one.  Now, it seems like there isn't really
that much work left to get dialog boxes working.  What you really just need to
do is implement container widgets, that is to say, subwindows that can contain
other subwindows.  For example, the tab widget works this way. (It sounds like
you have already implemented tab widgets, so I don't quite see how you've done
this without the concept of container widgets.) So you might just try adding a
framework for container widgets and then implementing very simple container
widgets.  The basic container widgets are:

1. A vertical-layout widget, which draws nothing itself and lays out its
children one above the next.
2. A horizontal-layout widget, which draws nothing itself and lays out its
children side-to-side.
3. A box (or "grouping") widget, which draws a rectangle around its single child
and optionally draws some text on the top or bottom line of the rectangle.
4. A tab widget, which displays a series of tabs horizontally at the top of its
area, and then below it places one of its children,
corresponding to the selected tab.
5. A user widget, which draws nothing itself and does no layout at all on its
children, except that it has a "layout callback"
property, a Lisp function, so that the programmer can control the layout.

The framework is as follows:

1. Every widget has at least the following properties:
     a) a size, whose value can be "unspecified", which might be implemented
using the value -1.  The default value should be "unspecified".
     b) whether it's mapped, i.e. whether it will be displayed. (Some container
widgets, such as the tab widget, set the mapped
property themselves on their children.  Others, such as the vertical and
horizontal layout widgets, don't change this property but pay attention to it,
and ignore completely all children marked as unmapped.) The default value should
be "true".
     c) whether its size can be changed by another widget's layout routine. The
default value should be "true".
     d) a layout procedure, which (potentially at least) determines the size of
the widget as well as the position, size and mappedness of its child widgets.
The layout procedure is inherent in the widget and is not an external property
of the widget (except in the case of the "user widget"): it is instead more like
the redisplay callback that each widget has.
2. Every container widget contains a property which is a list of child widgets.
3. Every child widget contains the following properties:
     a) a position indicating where the child is located relative to the top
left corner of its parent.  The position's value can be "unspecified", which
might be implemented using the value -1.  The default value should be
"unspecified".
     b) whether its position can be changed by another widget's layout routine.
The default value should be "true".
4. All of the properties just listed (except possibly the layout procedure) can
be modified directly by the programmer, and there are no proscriptions against
doing so.  However, if the programmer wants to resize, reposition, map or unmap
a widget in such a way that the layout of all the other widgets in the tree
changes appropriately, he should use a special function to change the property,
as described below.

The redisplay mechanism pays attention to the position, size, and mappedness
properties and to the hierarchy of widgets, mapping, resizing and repositioning
the corresponding subwindows (the "real representation" of the widgets) as
necessary.  It also pays attention to the hierarchy of the widgets, making sure
that container subwindows get drawn before their child subwindows.  When it
encounters widgets with an unspecified size, it should not draw them, and should
issue a warning.  When it encounters widgets with an unspecified position, it
should draw them at position (0, 0) and should issue a warning.

The above framework should be fairly simple to implement and is basically
universal across all high-level windowing system toolkits.  The stickyness comes
with what procedures you follow for getting the layout done.

Andy, I understand that implementing this may seem like a daunting task.
Therefore, I propose that at first you implement the above framework but don't
implement any of the layout procedures, or any of the functions that call them:
Just make them stubs that do nothing.  This way, the Lisp programmer can still
create any dialog boxes he wants, he just has to set the sizes and positions of
all the widgets explicitly, and then recompute them whenever the widget tree is
resized (once you get around to allowing this).  I have a lot more to write
about exactly how the layout procedures work, but I'll send that to you later
once you're ready.

You should also think about making a way to have widget trees as top-level
windows rather than just glyphs in a buffer.  There's already the concept of
"popup" frames.  You could provide an easy way to create a popup frame with no
menu, toolbars, scrollbars, modeline or minibuffer, and put a single glyph in
the displayed buffer that takes up the whole Emacs window.

Ben




March 20, 2000

You wrote to me awhile ago about this and asked about documentation, and I
dictated a response but never got it sent, so here it is:

I don't think there's any more documentation on how things work under Xt but it
should be clear. The EmacsFrame widget is the widget corresponding to the X
window that Emacs draws into and there is a handler for expose events called
from Xt which arranges for the invalidated areas to get redrawn. I think this
used to happen as part of the handler itself but now it is delayed until the
next call to redisplay.

However, one thing that you absolutely must not do is remove the Xt support.
This would be an incredibly unfriendly thing to do as it would prevent people
from using any widget set other than Qt or GTK. Keep in mind that people run
XEmacs on all sorts of different versions of X in Unix, and Xt is the standard
and the only toolkit that probably exists on all of these systems.

Pardon me if I've misunderstood your intentions w.r.t. this.

As for how you would implement GTK support, it will not be very hard to convert
redisplay to draw into a GTK window instead of an Xt window. In fact redisplay
basically doesn't know about Xt at all, except in the portion that handles
updating menubars and scrollbars and stuff that's directly related to Xt.

What you'd probably want to do is create a new set of event routines to replace
the ones in event-Xt.c. On the display side you could conceivably create a new
device type but you probably wouldn't want to do that because it would be an
externally visible change at the Lisp level. You might simply want to put a
flag on each frame indicating what sort of toolkit the frame was created under
and put conditions in the redisplay code and the code to update toolbars and
menubars and so forth to test this flag and do the appropriate thing.


April 12, 2000

This is way cool, buuuuutttttttt .............

what we @strong{really} need is the GUI interface on top of it.  I've taken a shot at
it with generic-print-buffer
(print-buffer is taken by lpr, which is such a total mess that it needs to be
trashed; or at least, the generic
stuff in this package needs to be taken out and properly genericized).  For
the moment, generic-print-buffer
just does something like what Kirill's been posting if we're running windows,
and uses lpr otherwards.  However, what we absofuckinglutely need is a Lisp
interface onto @code{EnumPrinters()} so that we can get the
list of printers and have a nice menu listing the available printers, and you
can check the one you want.  People in the Windows world don't normally even
know the names of their local printers!

Kirill, given what I've done in @file{simple.el} and @file{menubar-items.el}, do you think
you could add the @code{EnumPrinters()}
support and fix up the GUI?  If you don't feel comfortable with the GUI, at
least do the @code{EnumPrinters()}.

But ...  Kirill, I tried your formula for printing and nothing happened.
Perhaps I didn't call redisplay-frame or something?  You need to fix this up
and make it work for multi-page documents. (Again, this is in
generic-print-buffer.)  Nothing special, it just needs to fucking work!  There
are zillions and zillions of postings every day on xemacs-nt about how to get
printing working, and none seem to refer to the built-in support.

ben


April 19, 2000

Kirill 'Big K' Katsnelson wrote:

> Some time ago, Ben Wing wrote...
> >kirill, the interface i created is more general, like this:
>
> [snip]
>
> >Unfortunately I haven't implemented much of this; just some of the file
> >dialog box.  but i think
> >this is better than creating new mswindows-specific primitives.  if you
> >are interested in working on
> >this, i'll send you the code i have.
>
> Sure. Can you just commit it for my starting point?
>
> >also, the dialogs shouldn't have anything directly to do with the printer
> >device.  all they should
> >do is return a set of values.  it's the caller's responsibility to
> >interpret them and set device
> >properties accordingly.  this way, there's a complete separation between
> >the underlying
> >functionality and the gui.
>
> Unfortunately. I thought about doing it this way, but we then lose a lot of
> printer-specific setup in this case. The DEVMODE structure contains two
> parts: printer independent, as defined by SDK typedef DEVMODE, and
> some trailing bytes, of unknown structure, used by a driver. The driver
> only returns the extra length it wants. Such options as PCL ReT resolution
> enhancement options or PostScript negative output are not available
> through the standard part of the devmode structure, and stored in the
> driver part (printer dialogs are driver-specific).
>
> So we have total of three options:
> - Not to implement options beyond standard DEVMODE
> - Make DEVMODE a Lisp object.
> - Hide DEVMODE inside the device object.
>
> First case looks cheesy. Letting DEVMODE fall off the printer is no good
> either, since one needs both the device and the devmode to edit the
> devmode, and they must match. I am still convinced that the devmode and
> the printer should not be separated.

hmm, i see ...  this completely breaks abstraction though.  it fails in various
scenarios, e.g. a program wants to initialize the dialog box with certain
non-driver-specific properties, without caring about the particular printer.

i think you should create a new print-properties object that encapsulates all
printer properties (which can be changed using get/put), including the printer
name, and contains a DEVMODE in it.  if the printer name gets changed, the
DEVMODE might change too, but the print-properties object itself stays the
same.  you pass this object as a parameter to the dialog box, and it gets
changed accordingly.  you can call something like set-device-print-properties to
stick everything in this structure into the device. (you could imagine a case
where someone wanted to keep multiple print configurations around ...)

>
>
> Big K

--
Ben

@end example

@node Discussion -- Multilingual Issues, Discussion -- Instantiators and Generic Property Accessors, Discussion -- Dialog Boxes, Future Work Discussion
@section Discussion -- Multilingual Issues
@cindex discussion, multilingual issues
@cindex multilingual issues, discussion

@example

                                                     4/10/2000 4:13 AM

BTW I am planning on adding some more powerful font-mapping capabilities to
XEmacs (i.e. how do we map particular characters to the proper fonts that can
display them, and how do we map the character's codes to the indices into the
font).  These will replace to hackish charset-registry/charset-ccl-program stuff
we currently have, and be [a] much more powerful, [b] designed in a
window-system-independent way, [c] works with specifiers so you can control the
mapping of individual buffers, and [d] works on a character rather than charset
level, to correctly handle Unicode.  One possible usage would be to declare that
all latin1 in a particular buffer to be displayed with latin2 fonts; I bet
Hrvoje would really appreciate that

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

April 10, 2000

[info from "creation of generic macros for accessing internally formatted data"]

Hmm, so there I just wrote a detailed design for the macros.  I would be
@strong{THRILLED} and overjoyed if you went ahead and implemented this mechanism, or
parts of it.

I've just finished arranging for a new transcriptionist, and soon I should be
able to send off and get back my dictation of my (a) exposing streams to lisp,
and (b) allowing for proper lisp-created coding systems, which define their
reading, writing, and detecting methods in lisp.


BTW How's it going wrt your Unicode and decode-priority stuff?

And ...  you sent me mail asking what it was you had promised me, and listed
only one thing, which was
profiling of vm and certain other operations you found showed tremendous
slowdown with Japanese characters.  The other main thing I want from you is

-- Your priorities, as an actual Japanese user and XEmacs developer,
concerning what MULE work should be done, how it should be done, in what
order, etc.

I'm sure there's something else, but it's been awhile since I took my sleeping
dose and my brain can barely function anymore.  Just let me know how you're
going to proceed with the above macro changes.

BTW there's some nice Perl scripts written by Martin and fixed by me to make
global-search-and-replace
much, much easier.  I've attached them.  The first one is a shell script that
works like

gr foo bar *.[ch]

and replaces foo with bar in all of the files.  For each modified file, a
backup is created in the backup/ directory, which is created as necessary.
This shell script is a fairly trivial front end onto global-replace2, which is
a perl script that takes one argument (a Perl expression such as s/foo/bar/g)
and a list of files obtained by reading the stdin, and does the same global
replacement.  This means that the regexp syntax used here has to be perl-style
rather than standard emacs/grep style.

ben

---------------------------------------------------------------------


From: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
                                                    12/23/1999 3:34 AM

 Subject:
        Re: check process state before accessing coding_stream (fix PR#1061)
     To: 
        "Stephen J. Turnbull" <turnbull@@sk.tsukuba.ac.jp>
    CC: 
        XEmacs Developers <xemacs-beta@@xemacs.org>




Thankfully, nearly all of this horridity you bring up is irrelevant.  In
XEmacs, "gettext" does not refer to any standard API, but is merely a stand-in
for a translation routine (presumably written by us).  We may as well call it
something else.  We define our own concept of "current language".  We also
allow for a function that needs a different version for each language, which
handles all cases where simple translation isn't sufficient, e.g. when you
have to pluralize some noun given to you or insert the correct form of the
definite article.  No weird hacks needed.  No interaction problems with other
pieces of software.

What I wrote "awhile ago" is (unfortunately) not anywhere public currently,
but it's on my list to put it on the web site.  "There you go again" is
usually not true; most of what I quote was indeed put out publicly at some
point, but I'll try to be more explicit about this in the future.

ben

"Stephen J. Turnbull" wrote:

> >>>>> "Ben" == Ben Wing <ben@@666.com> writes:
>
>     Ben> "Stephen J. Turnbull" wrote:
>
>     >> What I have in mind is not just gettext-izing everything in the
>     >> XEmacs core sources.  I currently believe that to be
>     >> unacceptable
>
>     Ben> I don't quite understand.  Could you elaborate and give some
>     Ben> examples?
>
> Examples?  Hmm.
>
> First, there's the surface of Jan's y-or-n-p example.  You have to
> coordinate the translation of the message string and the response
> prompt.  This is handled by y-or-n-p itself (I see that we already do
> have gettext for Emacs Lisp, that's nice to know).
>
> Except that it's not really handled by y-or-n-p.  There's no reason to
> suppose that somebody writing a Lisp package would necessarily use the
> XEmacs domain (in fact, due to the way gettext binds text domains---if
> I understand that correctly---we don't want that to be the case,
> because it means that every time a Lisp package is updated the whole
> XEmacs catalog must also be updated).  So which domain gets used for
> the message string?
>
> In the current implementation, it is the domain of y-or-n-p.  So
> packages with their own domain won't get y-or-n-p prompts correctly
> translated.  But that means that the package should do its own
> translation.  But now you're applying gettext to the same string
> twice; you just have to pray the that translator upstream doesn't
> collide with an English string that's in the XEmacs domain.  (The
> gettext docs mention the similar problem of English words with
> multiple meanings that must map to different words in the target
> language; this can be disambiguated by various trickeries in forming
> the strings ... but only if you "own" them, which in the multi-domain,
> interated gettext example you do not.)  AFAICT this means that you
> must never pass untranslated strings across public APIs, but this may
> or may not be reasonable, and certainly is inconvenient.
>
> Next, we have to translate the possible answer strings to match the
> language being passed by the user.  This is presumably OK here,
> because it's done by y-or-n-p.  But what if y-or-n-p returned a string
> rather than a boolean?  Then we would need to coordinate the
> presentation of the prompt (done by y-or-n-p) and the translation of
> the possible answer strings (done by the caller).  This can in fact be
> done using dgettext with the XEmacs domain, but you must know that
> y-or-n-p is in the XEmacs domain.  This is not necessarily going to be
> obvious, and it might very well be that sets of related packages might
> have the same domain, so you wouldn't necessarily know which domain is
> appropriate by looking at the requires.
>
> And what happens if one domain does supply translations for a language
> and the other does not?  AFAIK, gettext has no way to find out if this
> is the case.  But you might very will prefer a global fallback to
> English if substantial phrases are drawn from both domains, while you
> might prefer string-by-string fallback if the main text is translated
> and only a few words are left to fallback to English.
>
> Aside from confusing users, this puts a great burden on programmers.
> Programmers need to know about the status of the domains of packages
> they use as well as the XEmacs domain; they need to program
> defensively against the possibility that some package they use will
> become gettext-ized, or the translation projects will be out of synch
> (some teams will do the calling package first, others will do the
> caller package first).
>
> I don't think anybody will use gettext in these circumstances.  At
> least not after they get the first bug report that "XEmacs is stuck in
> an infinite y-or-n-p loop and I can't get out."
>
>     Ben> I wrote this awhile ago:
>
> "There you go again."  Not anywhere I could see it!  (At least, it
> doesn't look familiar and grepping the archives doesn't turn it up.)
>
> OK, you win.  Subscribe me to xemacs-review.  Or whatever seems
> appropriate.
>
> --
> University of Tsukuba                Tennodai 1-1-1 Tsukuba 305-8573 JAPAN
> Institute of Policy and Planning Sciences       Tel/fax: +81 (298) 53-5091
> _________________  _________________  _________________  _________________
> What are those straight lines for?  "XEmacs rules."

--
In order to save my hands, I am cutting back on my responses, especially
to XEmacs-related mail.  You _will_ get a response, but please be patient.
If you need an immediate response and it is not apparent in your message,
please say so.  Thanks for your understanding.



--------------------------------------------------------------------


From: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
                                                    12/21/1999 2:22 AM

 Subject:
        Re: check process state before accessing coding_stream (fix PR#1061)
     To: 
        "Stephen J. Turnbull" <turnbull@@sk.tsukuba.ac.jp>
    CC: 
        XEmacs Developers <xemacs-beta@@xemacs.org>





"Stephen J. Turnbull" wrote:

> >>>>> "Ben" == Ben Wing <ben@@666.com> writes:
>
>     Ben> Implementing message translation is not that hard.
>
> What I have in mind is not just gettext-izing everything in the XEmacs
> core sources.  I currently believe that to be unacceptable (see Jan's
> message for the pitfalls in I18N; it's worse for M17N).  I think
> really solving this problem needs a specifier-like fallback mechanism
> (this would solve Jan's example because you could query the
> text-specifier presenting the question for the affirmative and
> negative responses, and the catalog-building mechanism would have
> checks to make sure they were properly set, perhaps a locale
> (language) argument), and gettext is just not sufficient for that.

I don't quite understand.  Could you elaborate and give some examples?

>
>
> At a minimum, we need to implement gettext for Lisp packages.
> (Currently, gettext is only implemented for C AFAIK.)  But this could
> potentially cuase more trouble than it's worth.
>
>     Ben> A lot depends on priority: How important do you think this
>     Ben> issue is to your average Japanese/Chinese/etc. user?
>
> Which average Japanese (etc) user?  The English-skilled (relatively)
> programmer in the free software movement, or my not-at-all-competent
> undergrad students who I would love to have using an Emacs?  This is a
> really important ease-of-use issue.
>
> Realistically, for Japanese, it's low priority.  The Japanese team in
> the GNU Translation Project is doing very little AFAIK, so even if the
> capability were there, I doubt the message catalog would soon be done.
>
> But I think that many non-English speakers would find it very
> attractive, and for many languages there are well-organized and
> productive translation teams.  I suspect that if the I18N facility
> were well-designed, many Western European languages would have full
> catalogs within a year (granted, they are the ones where it's least
> needed :-( ).
>
> Personally, I think doing it well is hard, and of little benefit to
> _current_ core XEmacs constituency.  I think doing a good job, with
> catalogs, would be very attractive to many non-English-speaking
> _potential_ users.
>
>     Ben> How does it compare to some of the other important Mule
>     Ben> issues that Martin and I are (trying to work) on?
>
> I don't know what you guys are _trying_ to work on.  Everything in the
> I18N section of "Architecting XEmacs" is red-flagged.  OTOH, it's
> clear from your posts that you are overburdened, so I can't read
> priority into the fact that you've responded to specific issues in the
> past.

I wrote this awhile ago:


>
>     Ben> The big question is, would you be willing to help do the
>     Ben> actual implementation, to "be my hands"?
>
> Sure, subject to the usual caveat that I'd need to be convinced it's
> worth doing and a secondary caveat that I am not an experienced coder.

If you'll implement it, I'll design it.  It's more a case of will on your part
than anything else.  I can give you instructions sufficient enough to match
your level of expertise.

ben

>
>
> --
> University of Tsukuba                Tennodai 1-1-1 Tsukuba 305-8573 JAPAN
> Institute of Policy and Planning Sciences       Tel/fax: +81 (298) 53-5091
> _________________  _________________  _________________  _________________
> What are those straight lines for?  "XEmacs rules."

--
In order to save my hands, I am cutting back on my responses, especially
to XEmacs-related mail.  You _will_ get a response, but please be patient.
If you need an immediate response and it is not apparent in your message,
please say so.  Thanks for your understanding.



-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Dec 20, 1999


Implementing message translation is not that hard.  I've already done a lot of
preliminary work in places such as @file{make-msgfile.lex} in lib-src/.  Finishing up
the work is not that big a task; I already know exactly how it should be
done.  Perhaps I'll write up detailed design instructions for this, as I'm
doing for other things.  A lot depends on priority: How important do you think
this issue is to your average Japanese/Chinese/etc. user?  How does it compare
to some of the other important Mule issues that Martin and I are (trying to
work) on?  If I did the design document, would you be willing to do the
necessary bit of C hackery to implement the document?  If the design document
is not specific enough for you, I can give you an "implementation document"
which will definitely be specific enough: i.e. I'll show you exactly where the
code needs to be modified, and how.  The big question is, would you be willing
to help do the actual implementation, to "be my hands"?

---------------------------------------------------------------------------

From: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
                                                    12/14/1999 11:00 PM

 Subject:
        Re: Mule UI disaster: displaying character tables
     To: 
        Hrvoje Niksic <hniksic@@iskon.hr>
    CC: 
        XEmacs vs Mule <xemacs-mule@@xemacs.org>




What I mean is, please put my name in the header, as well as xemacs-mule.
That way I'll see it in my personal box.

I agree that Mule has problems, but:

Brokenness can be fixed.
Slowness can be fixed.
Limitations can be fixed.

The design limitation you mention below, for example, is not really very
hard to change.

Keep in mind that I pretty much rewrote Mule from scratch, and did it
@strong{all} in 6-7 months.  In comparison with that, the changes below are
pretty minor, and each could be done by a good (and able-bodied!)
programmer familiar with the Mule code in less than a week -- to the
XEmacs code, at least.  The problem is, everyone who could do this work is
instead spending their time complaining about Mule problems instead of
doing things.

I'll gladly help out anyone who wants to do Mule coding by explaining all
the details; I'll even write a "Mule internals manual", if that will
help.  I can also make international phone calls -- they're cheap here in
the US due to the long distance wars.  But so far no one has asked me for
help or shown any willingness to do any work on Mule.

Perhaps people are daunted by the seeming vastness of the problems.  But I
wager that if I had another 6 months to work on nothing but Mule, it would
be nearly perfect.  The basic design of the XEmacs C code is good;
incremental changes, without over-much concern for compatibility, could
make huge strides in a short amount of time (as was the case the whole
time I worked on it, esp. towards the end -- it didn't even @strong{compile} for
4 months!).  A "total rewrite" would be an incredible waste of time.

Again, I'm completely willing to provide help, documentation, design
improvement suggestions (ala Architecting XEmacs -- which seems to have
been completely ignored, alas), etc.

ben

Hrvoje Niksic wrote:

> Ben Wing <ben@@666.com> writes:
>
> > I'm the one who did most of the Mule work in XEmacs, so if you have
> > any questions about the core, please address them to me directly.  I
> > can probably give you a very clear and detailed answer.
>
> Thanks.  I think it still makes sense to ask here, so that other
> developer have a chance to chime in.
>
> > However, I need some explanation.  What's misdesigned that you're
> > complaining about?  And what's the coding-system disaster?
>
> It's been spoken of a lot.  Basically:
>
> * Unlike XEmacs/no-Mule, XEmacs/Mule doesn't preserve binary files in
>   Latin 2 locales by default.  This is annoying for users who are used
>   to XEmacs/no-Mule.
>
> * XEmacs/Mule is much slower than XEmacs, and not only because of
>   character/byte conversions.  It seems that font lookups etc. are
>   slower.
>
> * The "coding-system disaster" refers to inherent limitations of the
>   coding-system model.  If I understand things correctly,
>   coding-systems convert streams of bytes to streams of Emchars.  It
>   does not appear to be possible to create a "gzip" coding system for
>   handling gzipped file.  Even EOL conversions look kludgish:
>
>     iso-2022-8
>     iso-2022-8-dos
>     iso-2022-8-mac
>     iso-2022-8-unix
>     iso-2022-8bit-ss2
>     iso-2022-8bit-ss2-dos
>     iso-2022-8bit-ss2-mac
>     iso-2022-8bit-ss2-unix
>     iso-2022-int-1
>     iso-2022-int-1-dos
>     iso-2022-int-1-mac
>     iso-2022-int-1-unix
>
>   Ideally, it should be possible to specify a stream of
>   coding-systems, where only the last one converts to actual Emchars.
>
> There are more problems I don't remember right now.  Many many usage
> problems become apparent when I stand and look over the shoulders of
> an XEmacs users who tries to use Mule.

--
In order to save my hands, I am cutting back on my responses, especially
to XEmacs-related mail.  You _will_ get a response, but please be patient.

If you need an immediate response and it is not apparent in your message,
please say so.  Thanks for your understanding.



-----------------------------------------------------------------------




From: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
                                                   12/14/1999 12:20 AM

 Subject:
        Re: Mule UI disaster: displaying character tables
     To: 
        "Stephen J. Turnbull" <turnbull@@sk.tsukuba.ac.jp>
    CC: 
        XEmacs vs Mule <xemacs-mule@@xemacs.org>




I think you should go ahead with your proposal, and assume it will get
implemented.  I don't think Martin is really suggesting that API changes not
be allowed, but just that they proceed in a somewhat orderly fashion; and in
any case, I imagine I have final say in cases of Mule-related conflicts.

ben

"Stephen J. Turnbull" wrote:

> >>>>> "Hrvoje" == Hrvoje Niksic <hniksic@@iskon.hr> writes:
>
>     Hrvoje> So next I tried the "Mule" menu.  That's right, boys and
>     Hrvoje> girls, I've never looked at it before.
>
> For quite a while, it didn't work at all, led to crashes and other
> warm/fuzzy things.  IIRC there used to be a top level menu item
> pointing to information about the current language environment but it
> got removed.
>
>     Hrvoje> Wow.  Seeing shift_jis, iso-2022 variants and (above all
>     Hrvoje> things) big5 makes me really warm and fuzzy.
>
> We've been through this recently---you were there.  We know what to do
> about it, basically (Ben liked my proposal, and it would fix this
> silliness as well as the binary file breakage).  But given that Ben
> and Martin seem to have different ideas about where to go with Mule
> (Ben seemed to be supporting API and implementation revisions, Martin
> evidently wants to keep the current Mule), working on that proposal is
> possibly a waste of time.  I've got other stuff on my plate and I'll
> get back to it one of these days (not tomorrow but sooner than Real
> Soon Now).
>
>     Hrvoje> The items it presents (leading to further submenus) are:
>
>     Hrvoje>     94 character set
>     Hrvoje>     94 x 94 character set
>     Hrvoje>     96 character set
>
> This _is_ bad UI, now that you point it out.  But it is quite natural
> for a coding system lawyer (as all Japanese users have to be), I never
> noticed it before.  Easy enough to fix ("raise my karma").
>
>     Hrvoje> But I do bear some Mule scars, so I happily select "96
>     Hrvoje> character sets", then ISO8859-2.  And I get this:
>
> [Table omitted]
>
>     Hrvoje> So me wonders: what the hell is this?
>
> Huh?  That is the standard table that you see over and over again in
> references.  I'll believe you if you say you've never seen one before,
> but every Japanese users' manual has dozens of pages of those, using
> exactly that format.
>
> The presentation in the range 00--7F is not unreasonable for Latin 2;
> ISO-8859 is a version of ISO-2022, so the high bit should not be
> interpreted as "+ x80" (technically speaking), it should be
> interpreted as a character set shift.
>
> Of course, this doesn't make sense to anybody but a character set
> lawyer, and so should be changed.  Especially since the header refers
> to ISO-8859-2 which everybody these days thinks of as _one, 8-bit_
> character set, not two 7-bit ones.
>
> As for the "Japanese" in the table, that's just a really stupid
> "optimization": those happen to be line-drawing characters available
> in JIS X 0208, to make pretty borders.  Substitute "-", "+", and "|"
> in appropriate places to make ugly but portable borders.
>
>     Hrvoje> Mule is just broken.  Warn your friends.
>
> Hrvoje is on the rampage again.  Warn your friends ;-)
>
> --
> University of Tsukuba                Tennodai 1-1-1 Tsukuba 305-8573 JAPAN
> Institute of Policy and Planning Sciences       Tel/fax: +81 (298) 53-5091
> _________________  _________________  _________________  _________________
> What are those straight lines for?  "XEmacs rules."

--
In order to save my hands, I am cutting back on my responses, especially
to XEmacs-related mail.  You _will_ get a response, but please be patient.
If you need an immediate response and it is not apparent in your message,
please say so.  Thanks for your understanding.



---------------------------------------------------------------------------

From: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
                                                    12/14/1999 10:28 PM

 Subject:
        Re: Autodetect proposal; specifer questions/suggestions
     To: 
        "Stephen J. Turnbull" <turnbull@@sk.tsukuba.ac.jp>




I've always thought the specifier API is too complicated (and too
"write-only"), but I went back at one point well after I designed it and I
couldn't figure out an obvious way to simplify it that still kept reasonable
functionality.  Perhaps that's what Custom did, and why it turned out bad.

Inefficiency is a stupid reason not to use them.  They seem efficient enough
for redisplay.  Changing them might be inefficient, but Emacs Lisp is in
general, right?

Can you propose an API or functionality change that will make them more used?



"Stephen J. Turnbull" wrote:

> >>>>> "Ben" == Ben Wing <ben@@666.com> writes:
>
>     Ben> I think you should go ahead with your proposal, and assume it
>     Ben> will get implemented.
>
> OK.  "yas baas" ;-)
>
> On something totally different.  I'm really bothered by the fact that
> specifiers are so little used (eg, Custom reimplements them badly),
> and the fact that every package seems to define its own set of faces
> (or whatever), rather than use the specifier mechanism to inherit from
> existing ones, or add new specifications to existing ones.  API problem?
>
> Also, faces (maybe specifiers in general?) should have an autoload
> mechanism, and a @file{<package>-faces.el} (or @file{<package>-specifiers.el})
> convention.  There are a number of faces in (eg) Custom that I like to
> use, but I have to load Custom to get them.  And Custom should be able
> to somehow see all the faces in various packages available, even when
> they are not loaded.
>
> I've seen claims that specifiers aren't very efficient.
>
> Opinions?
>
> --
> University of Tsukuba                Tennodai 1-1-1 Tsukuba 305-8573 JAPAN
> Institute of Policy and Planning Sciences       Tel/fax: +81 (298) 53-5091
> _________________  _________________  _________________  _________________
> What are those straight lines for?  "XEmacs rules."

--
In order to save my hands, I am cutting back on my responses, especially
to XEmacs-related mail.  You _will_ get a response, but please be patient.
If you need an immediate response and it is not apparent in your message,
please say so.  Thanks for your understanding.


-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
From: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
                                                     11/18/1999 9:02 PM

 Subject:
        Re: Char-related crashes (hopefully) fixed
     To: 
        "Stephen J. Turnbull" <turnbull@@sk.tsukuba.ac.jp>
    CC: 
        XEmacs Beta List <xemacs-beta@@xemacs.org>




OK, in summation:

1. C-q is a user-level function and should do whatever makes the most sense.
2. int-char is a low-level primitive and should never depend on high-level
settings like language environment.
3. Everything you can do with int-char can and should be done with make-char
-- representation-independent, much less likelihood of bugs, etc.  Therefore
int-char should be removed.
4. Note that CLTL2 also removes int-char.
5. Your statement

> In one-byte buffers (either Olivier's 1/2/4 extension or `xemacs -font
> *-iso8859-2') it implicitly will have dependence whatever you say.

is confusing internal and external representations.

ben

"Stephen J. Turnbull" wrote:

> Can somebody give a bunch of examples where using integers as
> characters is useful?  For that matter, where they are actually used?
> Ben said "backward compatibility," but I haven't seen this used, and I
> don't really know how to grep for it.  I have grepped for int-char,
> int-to-char, char-int, and char-to-int and they're pretty rare in the
> core and package code (2/3 of it) that I have.
>
> The only one that I ever use is the C-q hack for inserting characters
> by code value at the keyboard, and that could arguably (and in
> Japanese invariably is) delegated to an input method which would know
> about language environment (and return a true character).
>
> For iterating over a character set in "natural" order, only ASCII
> satisfies the requirement of having one, and even that's shaky.  AFAIK
> the Swedes and the Norwegians, or is it the Danes, disagree on
> ordering the _letters_ in ISO-8859-1 character set.  This really
> should be table-driven, and will have to be for everything except
> ASCII and ISO-8859-1 if we go to a Unicode internal representation.
>
> We already have primitives for efficient case conversion and the like.
>
> The only example I can think of offhand where you would really really
> want the facility is to iterate over a code space where you don't know
> which points are legal characters.  Eg, to print out tables of fonts.
> Pretty specialized.  And this can be done through make-char, anyway.
>
> According to CLtL1, the main portable use for char-int is for hashing.
> But that doesn't square with the kind of usage we've been talking
> about (in loops and the like).
>
> What else am I missing?
>
> Ben's desiderata have some problems.
>
> >>>>> "Ben" == Ben Wing <ben@@666.com> writes:
>
>     Ben> Either int-char should be the mirror opposite of char-int
>     Ben> (i.e. accept all legal char integers), or it should be
>     Ben> removed entirely.
>
> OK.  I agree with this.
>
>     Ben> int-char should @strong{never} have any dependence on the language
>     Ben> environment.
>
> In one-byte buffers (either Olivier's 1/2/4 extension or `xemacs -font
> *-iso8859-2') it implicitly will have dependence whatever you say.
> Even without Mule, people can always use external encoders to change
> raw ISO-8859-2 to ISO-2022 (not that anybody sane ever would, OK,
> Hrvoje?).  Then the two files will be interpreted differently in a
> Latin-1 locale Mule; the ISO-8859-2 file will be recognized as
> ISO-8859-1, and the ISO-2022 file will be internally interpreted as
> ISO-8859-2.
>
> The point is that people normally assume that int-char should accept
> their "natural" integer to character map.  For Americans, that's
> ASCII, for Germans, that's ISO-8859-1, for Croatians, that's
> ISO-8859-2.  And it works "correctly" in a no-mule XEmacs with `-font
> *-iso8859-2'!  Japanese usually use ku-ten or JIS, and there's a
> "natural" map from byte-sized integer pairs to shorts, but it's full
> of holes.  So language environments don't agree on what a legal char
> integer is, and where they do (eg, ISO-8859-1 and ISO-8859-2), they
> don't agree on the map.  To satisfy your dictum (with which I agree,
> but I take to mean we should get rid of these functions) we can take
> the intersection where they agree
>
> ==> legal char integers == ASCII
>
> which is what I prefer, or pick something arbitrary and efficient
>
> ==> char-int returns the internal representation
>
> which I really hate, or something else.  Suggestions?
>
>     Ben> I don't think C-q should either.  If Hrvoje wants to insert
>     Ben> Latin-2 characters by number, then make C-u C-q work so that
>     Ben> it also prompts for a character set, with a default chosen
>     Ben> from the language environment.
>
> And restrict this to ASCII?  Or assume Latin-1 in GR if there is no
> prefix argument?
>
> This is a useful feature.  C-q currently inserts Latin-2 characters
> for Hrvoje in no-mule XEmacs (stretching the point only a little); I
> think it should continue to do so in Mule.  This really is an input
> method issue, not a keyboard issue.  In XEmacs, inserting an integer
> into a buffer has no meaning.  Users insert characters.  So this is a
> completely different issue from the programming API, and should not be
> considered analogous.
>
> Maybe we could have C-q insert according to the Unicode standard, and
> treat C-u C-q as part of the input method.  But I think most users
> would prefer to have C-q insert according to their locale-standard
> tables, and select Unicode explicitly using the C-u C-q idiom.  In
> fact (again this points to the input method idea), Japanese users
> would probably like to have the alternatives of using kuten (pairs
> from 1--94 x 1--94) or JIS (pairs from 0x21--0x7E x 0x21--0x7E) as
> options since both indexing systems are common in tables.
>
> --
> University of Tsukuba                Tennodai 1-1-1 Tsukuba 305-8573 JAPAN
> Institute of Policy and Planning Sciences       Tel/fax: +81 (298) 53-5091
> __________________________________________________________________________
> __________________________________________________________________________
> What are those two straight lines for?  "Free software rules."

--
ben

--
In order to save my hands, I am cutting back on my responses, especially to
XEmacs-related mail.  You
_will_ get a response, but please be patient.  If you need an immediate
response and its not apparent in
your message, please say so.  Thanks for your understanding.



-----------------------------------------------------------------------------

From: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
                                                    11/16/1999 11:03 PM

 Subject:
        Re: Char-related crashes (hopefully) fixed
     To: 
        Yoshiki Hayashi <t90553@@m.ecc.u-tokyo.ac.jp>
    CC: 
        Hrvoje Niksic <hniksic@@iskon.hr>,
        XEmacs Beta List <xemacs-beta@@xemacs.org>




Either int-char should be the mirror opposite of char-int (i.e. accept all
legal char integers), or it should be removed entirely.

int-char should @strong{never} have any dependence on the language environment.

I don't think C-q should either.  If Hrvoje wants to insert Latin-2
characters by number, then make C-u C-q work so that it also prompts for a
character set, with a default chosen from the language environment.

ben

Yoshiki Hayashi wrote:

> Hrvoje Niksic <hniksic@@iskon.hr> writes:
>
> > As Ben said, now that we've fixed the actual bugs, we can think about
> > changing the behaviour for int-char conversions for 21.2.
>
> Following are proposed which integers should be accepted
> where characters are expected:
>
> 1) Don't allow anything
> 2) Accept 0-127
> 3) Accept 0-256
> 4) Accept everything
>
> Other things proposed are:
>
> a) When doing C-q, treat 128-256 as Latin-2 in Latin 2
>    language environment.
>
> So far, most of the proposal is intended to apply to every
> int-char conversions, I'd like to make some functions to
> accept.
>
> My plan is:
> Accept only 0-256 in every place except int-to-char.
> int-to-char accepts every valid integers.
> Make new function which does int-to-char conversion
> correctly according to the language environment.
>
> This way, most of the code which does (insert (1+ ?a)) or
> something continues working. Now internal representation is
> changed a little bit, so disabling > 256 characters will
> warn those who are dealing with internal representation
> directly, which is bad. Still, you can do
> (let ((i 1442))
>   (while (i < 2000)
>     (insert (int-to-char i))
>     (setq i (+1 i))))
> to achieve old behaviour.
>
> For C-q, I'm not for changing it's original definition,
> since it might confuse people who are expecting Latin-1 in
> other language environment and typing just 1 integer doesn't
> make sense for multibyte world. It's cleaner to make new
> function, which does make-char according to the charset of
> language-info-alist so that people who use that often can
> bind it to C-q or some other keys.
>
> --
> Yoshiki Hayashi

--
ben

--
In order to save my hands, I am cutting back on my responses, especially to
XEmacs-related mail.  You
_will_ get a response, but please be patient.  If you need an immediate
response and its not apparent in
your message, please say so.  Thanks for your understanding.



@end example

@node Discussion -- Instantiators and Generic Property Accessors, Discussion -- Switching to C++, Discussion -- Multilingual Issues, Future Work Discussion
@section Discussion -- Instantiators and Generic Property Accessors
@cindex discussion, instantiators and generic property accessors
@cindex instantiators and generic property accessors, discussion

From: Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
Date: Sun, 05 May 2002 05:40:07 -0700
Subject: generic functions, new instantiator API

I've been reading the C++ manual and getting polymorphism, inheritance, 
generic functions, etc. in my head.

We have our own "generic function" already in terms of `get', `put',
etc. which accept various objects.  i'm thinking of extending them so
they can accept, as well as objects, lists (either alists or plists)
or plist-style vectors, and manipulate their properties.  what do
people think of this?

Also, i'm designing a new API for "instantiators", which are objects 
whose main purpose is to hold properties and provide a way of notifying 
their containing specifiers when they change.  Instantiator objects are 
used when the instantiator gets sufficiently complicated that using 
lists and vectors gets unwieldy -- e.g. when creating widget trees, such 
as would appear in dialog boxes.  you want the ability to 
programmatically traipse up and down the tree and dynamically modify a 
part of the tree -- e.g. a property on a single widget -- as necessary, 
and have the internal code automatically notice this change and performs 
any necessary updates.  lists and vectors are too low-level for this -- 
no way to get their parent, no way for internal code to be notified when 
changes occur, can't always maintain object identity when making 
property changes, no way to error-check illegal changes, etc.

You could also extend this api to cover toolbars; it would probably make 
toolbar manipulation significantly easier.  but you'd have to think 
about backward compatibility in such cases.

here is what the api looks like so far -- making use of a newly-added 
facility for keyword args in primitives.  comments are welcome.

@example
DEFUN ("make-instantiator", Fmake_instantiator, 1, MANY, 0, /*
Create a new instantiator object from TYPE and PROPS.
TYPE should be one of the image instantiator formats described in 
`make-glyph'.
The rest of the arguments should be keyword properties and associated 
values,
as also described in `make-glyph'.

TYPE can also be an old-style vector instantiator.

Instantiator objects can be used as instantiators (see `make-specifier') in
glyphs in place of old-style vector instantiators.  They are especially
used for complicated, nested graphical elements such as widgets (buttons,
text fields, etc.) -- in fact, widget instantiators will automatically be
converted into instantiator objects if they are given in vector format.

Individual properties on instantiators can be manipulated using
`set-instantiator-property'.  If the property's value is a list (for
example, a list of children), you can also use `add-instantiator-item'
to add or insert individual elements in the list.

`delete-instantiator-item' can be used to delete individual items in the 
list;
`get-instantiator-item' to locate individual items in the list; and
`get-instantiator-item-position' to return the position of individual 
items in
the list.

`map-instantiator' can be used to (recursively or not) map over an
instantiator and its children.

`find-instantiator' can be used to (recursively or not) locate an 
instantiator
in a tree composed of an instantiator and its descendants.
*/
       /* (type &rest props) */
       (int nargs, Lisp_Object *args))
@{
  /* ^^#### */ return Qnil;
@}

DEFUN ("set-instantiator-property", Fset_instantiator_property, 3, 3, 0, /*
Set property PROP to VALUE in INSTANTIATOR.
INSTANTIATOR should have been created with `make-instantiator'.
Valid properties depend on the instantiator type and are described in
`make-glyph'.  For properties that are lists of items, individual items
can be added or deleted using `add-instantiator-item' and
`delete-instantiator-item'.

For compatibility, this also accepts an old-style vector instantiator, and
destructively modifies it; in this case, adding a property requires
creating a new vector, which is returned.  You need to use
`set-glyph-image' on glyphs, or `set-specifier-dirty-flag' on the result of
`glyph-image', to register instantiator changes to vector
instantiators. (New-style instantiators automatically convey property
changes to any glyphs they have been attached to.)
*/
       (instantiator, prop, value))
@{
  Lisp_Object *elt;
  int len;

  /* ^^#### */
  CHECK_VECTOR (instantiator);
  if (!KEYWORDP (prop))
    invalid_argument ("instantiator property must be a keyword", prop);

  elt = XVECTOR_DATA (instantiator);
  len = XVECTOR_LENGTH (instantiator);

  for (len -= 2; len >= 1; len -= 2)
    @{
      if (EQ (elt[len], prop))
    @{
      elt[len + 1] = value;
      break;
    @}
    @}

  /* Didn't find it so add it. */
  if (len < 1)
  @{
    Lisp_Object alist = Qnil, result;
    struct gcpro gcpro1;

    GCPRO1 (alist);
    alist = tagged_vector_to_alist (instantiator);
    alist = Fcons (Fcons (prop, value), alist);
    result = alist_to_tagged_vector (elt[0], alist);
    free_alist (alist);
    RETURN_UNGCPRO (result);
  @}

  return instantiator;
@}

DEFUN ("instantiator-property", Finstantiator_property, 2, 3, 0, /*
Return the property PROP of INSTANTIATOR, or DEFAULT if PROP has no value.
INSTANTIATOR should have been created with `make-instantiator'.
*/
       (instantiator, prop, default_))
@{
  /* ^^#### */ return Qnil;
@}

DEFUN ("instantiator-properties", Finstantiator_properties, 1, 1, 0, /*
Return a plist of all defined properties in INSTANTIATOR.
INSTANTIATOR should have been created with `make-instantiator'.
*/
       (instantiator))
@{
  /* ^^#### */ return Qnil;
@}

DEFUN ("instantiator-type", Finstantiator_type, 1, 1, 0, /*
Return the type of INSTANTIATOR.
INSTANTIATOR should have been created with `make-instantiator'.
Valid types are the instantiator formats described in `make-glyph'.
*/
       (instantiator))
@{
  /* ^^#### */ return Qnil;
@}

DEFUN ("instantiator-parent", Finstantiator_parent, 1, 1, 0, /*
Return the parent of INSTANTIATOR.
INSTANTIATOR should have been created with `make-instantiator'.
*/
       (instantiator))
@{
  /* ^^#### */ return Qnil;
@}

DEFUN_WITH_KEYWORDS ("map-instantiator", Fmap_instantiator, 2, 2, 1, 0, 
0, /*
Map FUN recursively over INSTANTIATOR and its descendants.
FUN is called with one argument, the INSTANTIATOR.
If:norecurse is non-nil, don't recurse, just map over the direct
children (not including the instantiator itself). 
*/
             (fun, instantiator),
             (norecurse))
@{
  /* ^^#### */ return Qnil;
@}

DEFUN_WITH_KEYWORDS ("find-instantiator", Ffind_instantiator, 3, 3,
             1, 0, 0, /*
Find an instantiator by PROP and VALUE in INSTANTIATOR and its descendants.
Returns first item which has PROP set to VALUE.
If:norecurse is non-nil, don't recurse, just look through the direct
children (not including the instantiator itself). 
*/
             (instantiator, prop, value),
             (norecurse))
@{
  /* ^^#### */ return Qnil;
@}

DEFUN_WITH_KEYWORDS ("add-instantiator-item", Fadd_instantiator_item, 3, 
3, 7,
             0, 0, /*
Add an item to an instantiator property that's a list of items.
\(E.g. the children of an instantiator).  PROP is the property whose list of
items is being modified, and ITEM is the item to add.  To insert somewhere
before the end, use one of the keywords:

--:position specifies a zero-based index of an item, and the new item 
will be
inserted just before the item indicated by the position.  Negative numbers
count from the end -- thus -1 will cause insertion before the last item, -2
before the second-to-last item, etc.

--:before-item and :after-item specify items to insert before or after.
:test (defaults to `eq') can be used to specify the way to compare the given
item with existing items.

--:before-property and :after-property search for an item to insert 
before or
after by looking for an item with the given property.  If :value is 
given, the
property must have that value; otherwise, it simply must exist.  This method
of insertion works if the items in PROP's list are anything that can have or
hold properties.  \("To have and to hold, for ever and ever ...")  This
includes:

-- any object for which `get' works
-- else, if object is a vector, assume it's a plist-style vector
-- else, if object is a cons, and its first element is also a cons,
   assume it's an alist
-- else, if object is a cons, assume it's a plist
*/
             (instantiator, prop, item),
             (position, before_item, after_item, test,
              before_property, after_property, value))
@{
  /* ^^#### */ return Qnil;
@}

DEFUN_WITH_KEYWORDS ("delete-instantiator-item", Fdelete_instantiator_item,
             2, 2, 5, 0, 0, /*
Delete an item in an instantiator property that's a list of items.

\(E.g. the children of an instantiator).  PROP is the property whose list is
being searched.  One of these keywords should be given:

--:position specifies a zero-based index of an item.  Negative numbers
count from the end -- thus -1 will cause insertion before the last item, -2
before the second-to-last item, etc.

--:item specifies the item to delete. :test (defaults to `eq') can be 
used to
specify the way to compare the given item with existing items.

--:property searches for an item with the given property.  If :value is
given, the property must have that value; otherwise, it simply must exist.
This method of insertion works if the items in PROP's list are anything that
can have or hold properties -- see `add-instantiator-item'.
*/
             (instantiator, prop),
             (item, test, position, property, value))
@{
  /* ^^#### */ return Qnil;
@}

DEFUN_WITH_KEYWORDS ("get-instantiator-item", Fget_instantiator_item,
             2, 2, 3, 0, 0, /*
Get an item in an instantiator property that's a list of items.

\(E.g. the children of an instantiator).  PROP is the property whose list is
being searched.  One of these keywords should be given:

--:position specifies a zero-based index of an item.  Negative numbers 
count
from the end -- thus -1 will cause insertion before the last item, -2 before
the second-to-last item, etc.

--:property searches for an item with the given property.  If :value is
given, the property must have that value; otherwise, it simply must exist.
This method of insertion works if the items in PROP's list are anything that
can have or hold properties -- see `add-instantiator-item'.
*/
             (instantiator, prop),
             (position, property, value))
@{
  /* ^^#### */ return Qnil;
@}

DEFUN_WITH_KEYWORDS ("get-instantiator-item-position",
             Fget_instantiator_item_position,
             2, 2, 4, 0, 0, /*
Return an item's position in an instantiator property that's a list of 
items.

\(E.g. the children of an instantiator).  PROP is the property whose list is
being searched.  One of these keywords should be given:

--:item specifies the item to search for. :test (defaults to `eq') can be
used to specify the way to compare the given item with existing items.

--:property searches for an item with the given property.  If :value is
given, the property must have that value; otherwise, it simply must exist.
This method of insertion works if the items in PROP's list are anything that
can have or hold properties -- see `add-instantiator-item'.
*/
             (instantiator, prop),
             (item, test, property, value))
@{
  /* ^^#### */ return Qnil;
@}

DEFUN ("image-instance-instantiator", Fimage_instance_instantiator, 1, 
1, 0, /*
Return the instantiator from which IMAGE-INSTANCE was created.
*/
       (image_instance))
@{
  /* ^^#### */ return Qnil;
@}
@end example

some other useful stuff:

@example
DEFUN ("make-image-instance", Fmake_image_instance, 1, 4, 0, /*
Return a new `image-instance' object.

Image-instance objects encapsulate the way a particular glyph (pixmap,
widget, etc.) is displayed on a particular device.  In most circumstances,
you do not need to directly create image instances; instead, you create a
glyph using `make-glyph' and add settings (or "instantiators") onto it
using `set-glyph-image', and XEmacs creates the image instances as
necessary.  However, it may occasionally be useful to explicitly create
image instances, if you want more control over the instantiation process.

For more information on instantiators and instances, see `make-specifier'.

DATA is an image instantiator, which describes the image; see `make-glyph'
for a description of the allowed values.

The most likely circumstance where you need to deal directly with image
instances is in widget callbacks -- e.g. the callback that's executed when
a button is pressed in a dialog box of type `general' (see
`make-dialog-box').  In this case, the widget that was activated is
described by an image instance. (The callback is usually be written as an
interactive function with an interactive spec of (interactive \"e\"), and a
single `event' argument.  The event will be an activate event, describing
the user action that trigged the callback.  The image instance is
retrievable from the event using `event-image-instance'.  Handling the
action may involve setting properties on the image instance or other image
instances in the dialog box in which the widget is usually contained -- or
changing the instantiator that generated the image instance, if you want
permanent changes that will be reflected the next time the dialog box is
popped up.  Properties on an image instance are set using
`set-image-instance-property'.  If the widget is part of a hierarchy of
widgets (as is usually the case in a dialog box, but may not apply if the
widget was inserted by itself in a buffer [by creating a glyph and
attaching it to an extent -- see `make-glyph']), there will be a
corresponding hierarchy of image instances to describe this particular
instance of the dialog box.  You can retrieve other image instances in the
hierarchy using primitives such as `image-instance-parent',
`image-instance-children', and `find-image-instance'.
@end example

...





@example
(defun image-instance-property (image-instance property &optional default)
  "Return the given property of the given image instance.
Returns DEFAULT if the property or the property method do not exist for
the image instance in the domain."
  (check-argument-type 'image-instance-p image-instance)
  (get image-instance property default))

(defun set-image-instance-property (image-instance prop value)
  "Set the property PROP on IMAGE-INSTANCE to VALUE.
Only certain properties of the image instance can be changed, and they
represent \"temporary\" changes.  If you want to make permanent changes,
you need to change the instantiator that generated the instance --
retrieve the instantiator with `image-instance-instantiator', and change
its properties with `set-instantiator-property'.

This applies mostly to widgets.  For example, you can set a property on
a widget image instance to change the state of a radio or checkbox button,
set the text currently in an edit field, etc.  However, those changes apply
only to the *currently* displayed widgets.  If these widgets are in a dialog
box, and you want to change the way the widgets in the dialog box appear
*each* time the dialog box is displayed, you need to change the 
instantiator.

Make sure you understand the difference between instantiators and
instances.  An \"instantiator\" is a specification, indicating how to
determine the value of a setting whose value can vary in different
circumstances or \"locales\" (buffers, frames, etc.).  An \"instance\" 
is the
resulting value in a particular circumstance.  For more information, see
`make-specifier'."
  (check-argument-type 'image-instance-p image-instance)
  (put image-instance prop value))
@end example

From: "Stephen J. Turnbull" <stephen@@xemacs.org> 
Date: 06 May 2002 16:40:46 +0900

>>>>> "Ben" == Ben Wing <ben@@666.com> writes:

    Ben> We have our own "generic function" already in terms of `get',
    Ben> `put', etc. which accept various objects.

I proposed extending the class to stuff like charsets about two years
ago, and I think you were one of the folks who objected.

    Ben> i'm thinking of extending them so they can accept lists
    Ben> (either alists or plists) or plist-style vectors, and
    Ben> manipulate their properties.  what do people think of this?

I think extending to lists is something we should approach
cautiously.  For one thing, if "get" is polymorphic, "put" would have
to be too.  But how does it decide when dealing with "nil"?

    Ben> you want the ability to programmatically traipse up and down
    Ben> the tree and dynamically modify a part of the tree -- e.g. a
    Ben> property on a single widget -- as necessary, and have the
    Ben> internal code automatically notice this change and performs
    Ben> any necessary updates.

I like this.

From: "Stephen J. Turnbull" <stephen@@xemacs.org> 
Date: 07 May 2002 11:17:05 +0900 

>>>>> "Neal" == Neal D Becker <nbecker@@hns.com> writes:

    Neal> I thought that generic polymorphism was inherent in lisp, as
    Neal> it is dynamically evaluated.  Why would you need anything
    Neal> special in the way functions are written to support generic
    Neal> programming?

I think it's basically a technical matter.  We have a number of
objects that have property lists besides symbols.  Many of them have
special functions (coding-system-get, coding-system-property,
charset-property are examples I find particularly obnoxious).  I would
like to make these obsolete by allowing `get' on charsets, coding
systems, etc.

And currently we have

(let ((p (symbol-plist symbol))) (plist-get p prop))

Ben would like to allow

(let ((p (symbol-plist symbol))) (get p prop))

with `get' determining whether P is a plist or an alist.  And where
Michael says "why not use hash tables?", I see `(get hash key)'
(probably to Michael's horror ;-).

This isn't Lisp any more, though, in some sense.  But then we haven't
been that for years.  AFAIK all real Lisps restrict `get' to symbols.

From: sperber@@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de (Michael Sperber [Mr. Preprocessor]) 
Date: Tue, 07 May 2002 08:52:53 +0200 

Indeed.  I'll just say "goosebumps."  But I don't see why it has to be
GET that accesses the plist.  You just build more dispatch into GET
with no immediate benefit to the API.  Ad-hoc genericity gets you
something when there's some place in the code you don't know what the
underlying object is.  I don't see this being the case here.  Why do
you find them "obnoxious?"

Stephen> This isn't Lisp any more, though, in some sense.  But then we haven't
Stephen> been that for years.  AFAIK all real Lisps restrict `get' to symbols.

Actually, Scheme (which admittedly isn't a real Lisp by many
standards) doesn't have get/put at all.  And good riddance, I might
add:-)

From: "Stephen J. Turnbull" <stephen@@xemacs.org> 
Date: 07 May 2002 20:04:50 +0900 

>>>>> "ms" == Michael Sperber <sperber@@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de> writes:

Stephen> special functions (coding-system-get, coding-system-property,
Stephen> charset-property are examples I find particularly obnoxious).  I would
Stephen> like to make these obsolete by allowing `get' on charsets, coding
Stephen> systems, etc.

    ms> But I don't see why it has to be GET that accesses the plist.
    ms> You just build more dispatch into GET with no immediate
    ms> benefit to the API.  Ad-hoc genericity gets you something when
    ms> there's some place in the code you don't know what the
    ms> underlying object is.  I don't see this being the case here.
    ms> Why do you find them "obnoxious?"

Their semantics are basically `get'.  Why not use that name?  Of
course I agree that it doesn't have to be `get', but why clutter
things up?

But those are particularly obnoxious because of the object/name
confusion they have built in.  Ie, my real problem with them is more
ancient Mule idiom than the *-get or *-property names for the API.

    ms> Actually, Scheme (which admittedly isn't a real Lisp by many
    ms> standards) doesn't have get/put at all.

What does it use instead?  (And no, you can't bait _me_ with Lisp
definition trolls, I think of XML as "declarative LISP with fat,
flavored, fuzzy parentheses.")

From: sperber@@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de (Michael Sperber [Mr. Preprocessor]) 
Date: Tue, 07 May 2002 13:26:13 +0200 

Stephen> Their semantics are basically `get'.  Why not use that name?

Because it doesn't convey as much information in the source code as it
could, and because it provides less type checking than it could.

Stephen> What does it use instead?

What for?  I've never felt the desire to use them, and it seems to me
that in Lisp, properties are usually used for one of two purposes:

- As a poor man's replacement for hash tables.

- To store data which should really be stored inside the object
  itself.

In the former case, I use a hash table.  In the latter case, I store
the data in the object itself.

@node Discussion -- Switching to C++, Discussion -- Windows External Widget, Discussion -- Instantiators and Generic Property Accessors, Future Work Discussion
@section Discussion -- Switching to C++
@cindex discussion, switching to c++
@cindex switching to c++, discussion

From: "Ben Wing" <ben@@666.com> 
Date: Fri, 10 May 2002 19:42:53 -0700 

i know i'm opening up a bag of worms by suggesting this, but what
about moving to C++?  I know others advocate this (Jan, Martin), and
the more I read Stroustrup's 3rd edition, the more I realize that
*HUGE* armounts of code in XEmacs, and in particular most of the
really hairy and hard-to-understand stuff -- lots of weird macros,
faux object-oriented stuff implemented in multiple places, each
differently (Lisp objects; methods on consoles/devices/etc; specifier
sub-types; coding-system sub-types; image-instance device methods;
image-instance format methds; etc.), all the GCPROS (which could go
entirely), dynarrs, eistring, etc. etc. -- is simply superseded by
stuff already built into C++ or supplied by the standard libraries.
Just now, I was going through the redisplay code, and noticing the
huge amount of duplication between gtk and X, something that's hard to
fix [except through super ad-hoc ways like using a .c file as a .h
file to "generate" lots of similar but slightly different code] in C,
but is extremely easy in C++ using inheritance [and/or templates].
for example, instead of having just one layer of device methods, you'd
have

@example
general -> tty
           -> windowing -> mswindows
                               -> xlike -> x, gtk
@end example
 
which would nicely and naturally encapsulate lots of duplicated [and
thus, hard to maintain] code.
 
even more of a win would be the GCPRO's.  Taking advantage of
constructors and destructors, we could simply do away [COMPLETELY!] 
with explicitly gcproing, and still have everything gcpro'd. [in fact,
much more reliably -- none of the dreaded "temporary" problem, and
every reference is always gcpro'd so we have greater flexibility for
GC work -- take note, Michael :-) -- e.g. we could safely garbage
collect when allocating, and we could even implement a relocating
garbage collector.  in the few places where performance might be an
issue [i seriously doubt there'd be many of them], we simply use a
separate Lisp_Object_No_GCPRO class (presumably a base class of
Lisp_Object), and manually handle the GCPRO's ourselves.  If we needed
to distinguish here between static and dynamic objects, or static
vs. local vs. heap, we could do so easily with bit flags in the object
pointed to -- we have space for lots of them.
 
code reliablity and maintainability would likely substantially
increase due to the ability to express most things in a natural C++
way instead of lots of weird hackish hard-to-understand C stuff
implementing stuff the language wasn't really designed for.
Furthermore, there are even some possibilities for increased speed --
many operations that can only reasonably be done now using Lisp
objects (and the associated gc overhead and such) could be done using
the high-level built-in facilities of C++, which in their ease of use
approach Lisp; and C++ has `inline' built-in, so we could easily add
various container classes to improve the understandability of the code
without loss of performance.
 
finally, making the "switch" is trivial, since martin did the initial
work making XEmacs C++-safe and I've been keeping it that way -- I
regularly build under C++ and fix any problems.  All we'd need to do
is switch the compiler and start gradually introducing C++ constructs
as we feel like it.
 
for those concerned that dumping might stop working, [a] i don't think
it would, [b] the portable dumper has come of age -- i use it almost
all the time, and it's rock-solid and not obviously slower than
unexec.
 
the only major concern that i see is the quality of the C++
implementations out there, in particular G++, which is the most widely
available.  I know that 6 years ago G++ was a bit rocky -- I went to
interview for Netscape, and they mentioned having to rely on various
vendor implementations of C++, whereas they would have preferred G++
if it was reliable, due to the sameness of environment.  But that was
*SIX YEARS* ago!  Stroustrup 3rd Edition has been out for 5 years now,
and it defines, as far as I know, ANSI Standard C++ -- so that's at
least 5 years to implement a standard.  It's hard to believe that G++
isn't completely reliable now; but I do not have as much experience as
others.
 
What do you think?  I would *really* like to make this change, as it
would immensely facilitate lots of code I'm working on and will be
working on, plus of course add all the above benefits once we get
around to converting the code.

From: "Stephen J. Turnbull" <stephen@@xemacs.org> 
Date: 11 May 2002 15:34:08 +0900 

I don't have a real problem with it, as long as we're very
conservative about it, ie, using C++ as "clean C with classes", and
introducing things slowly.  Implement everything ourselves, avoid the
standard class libraries.

I've been following the Python lists recently, and although the bias
is easy to guess, it's interesting to note that the people who are
most anti-C++ are typically the ones who are world-class C++
programmers with big projects under their belts.  Many of them
actually advocate using C rather than C++.

I do worry that with Martin currently out of the picture we don't have
an active C++ standards bigot and implementation collector to deal
with compiler-specific issues.  We do OK with C, but C++ is a much
more complex, subtle language.  Is there anybody else to plausibly
take on that role?

From: Hrvoje Niksic <hniksic@@arsdigita.com> 
Date: Sun, 12 May 2002 20:58:50 +0200 

I'm strongly opposed to this.  Here are some reasons:

* C++ may fix some problems, but it will introduce others, some of
  which may be much harder to fix.  XEmacs is already a large program,
  hard to understand.  C++ will not improve things.

* XEmacs will suddenly become uncompilable and unusable in
  many environments where it used to build perfectly fine -- for
  example, those that don't ship with a C++ compiler at all.  We could
  "make GCC 3 a requirement", but I don't like that idea.

* People without C++ experience will no longer be able to hack XEmacs.
  I'd be the first one to leave.  For example, I know quite a few
  programmers who don't care for Qt and KDE simply because it's C++.

* C is the /lingua franca/ of free software development.  If we're
  switching languages, it should be for a good reason and to something
  we agree is an improvement (e.g. Common Lisp).

* C++ is not the be-all end-all to everything.  People who undestand
  it well are usually the first ones to warn against it.  It's
  possible that they were scarred by using C++ at a bad time, but I'd
  think twice before discounting their advice or blindly believing
  that C++ is now all better.

If you were writing a new project, I'd say go for it.  But at this
point, this seems like a needless tweak.  Do we really need *more*
internal reorganizations?  Shouldn't we work on user-visible features?
Wasn't that what you yourself advocated when I talked to you?

From: Didier Verna <didier@@xemacs.org> 
Date: Tue, 14 May 2002 11:21:32 +0200 

       Switching to C++ has been suggested for the first time at the M17n'99
conference in Japan IIRC. Although it was around a table with many empty
bottles of beer on it :-), I've kept some hope from that time. I'm happy to
see Ben in favor of this today. This idea coming from him is likely to have
more impact than when it comes from me or Yan of whoever else.

        There are several points that make me in favor of this change:

- C++ support is already there thanks to Martin.

- The amount of OO simulation code written in C in XEmacs is *HUGE*. But more
  important, this code simulates *BASIC* OO features that are not any more a
  problem for any C++ compiler. I mean, by just using the basic features of
  C++ in terms of OO and data abstraction (classes, inheritance, methods (with
  inlining), operators overloading), we'll win big time in code size,
  readability, maintainability, and correctness.

- the fact that *basic* OO support is already a major gain is very important
  to me. You don't have to go generic programming with templates everywhere to
  write an OO XEmacs[1]. Switching to C++ can be completely gradual, and we
  can even stop early in the C++ features we use. That will already be a big
  gain. That's also the advantage over the idea of using another more modern
  language to rewrite the core; something completely unrealistic.

- there is another important aspect on the design issue: many people
  (including from the industry) have worked on abstracting common problems in
  an OO philosophy. Some people claim that the concepts that emerged from this
  kind of work of just C++ specific hackery, and they're probably right, but
  anyway that's obviously not a problem for us. Any C++ writer should have the
  "Design Patterns" book in hand. It already has good design solutions for
  many problems that we're facing in XEmacs (like, supporting more than one
  widget set), because these problems are so *common*. By using C++ we can
  directly benefit from the experience of other large applications designers.


Footnotes: 
[1]  We're working on GP in C++ in our lab here and we trigger bugs in gcc 3.
     But you should see the code in question, it's pure template and static
     programming. Things that XEmacs will never need.

From: Daniel Pittman <daniel@@rimspace.net> 
Date: Sat, 11 May 2002 19:15:04 +1000 

 I've been following the Python lists recently, and although the bias
> is easy to guess, it's interesting to note that the people who are
> most anti-C++ are typically the ones who are world-class C++
> programmers with big projects under their belts.  Many of them
> actually advocate using C rather than C++.

I wouldn't class myself as "world-class", but I can understand this
perspective based on my experiences with large projects that aim for
portability to vendor compilers, not just gcc.

The biggest problem, assuming that you are willing to ignore platforms
like Sinix-PC[1] and their poor compiler support[2] is that it's easy to
shoot yourself in the foot with C++.


The biggest portability problems are namespaces, the standard C++
library and template support, in about that order, followed by exception
handling.

Very few things get namespaces right, even today, with gcc being one of
the worst. Tempting as they are, they are best avoided where possible,
except in compiler and platform specific code.[3]


The standard C++ library, which supports RTTI and a few other things
including the [io]stream tools, is less than totally reliable although
it can be used with relative safety most places.

What you really need to watch out for with that is the extensions that
every vendor in the universe has added to their collections because
there isn't any standard way of doing common things in most of these
areas.


The Standard Template Library isn't. Aside from a tendency to expose
limitations of symbol name lengths[4] the library tends to be unreliable
in behavior between compilers and platforms. Not enough to make simple
things fail, though, just enough to make it occasionally do odd things
or show up obscure bugs in your code...

It's also not very well designed, I think, as libraries go. That's a
personal opinion, though, and not universal.


C++ exceptions are an interesting issue. They can work extremely well as
a mechanism for managing errors and improve the reliability of the
system.

They can also become an unending nightmare of epic proportions, causing
more pain and suffering than you can imagine. :/

The main difference between the two situations, so far as I can tell,
comes from two aspects of design that have ... far reaching
implications.

If you try adding exceptions to code that isn't ready to deal with them,
things tend to go very badly wrong. I /think/ that the existing
exception mechanisms in XEmacs would be similar enough that this isn't
the case, though.

The other is that you need to base your code very strongly around the
"construction acquires, destruction releases" model of resource
handling. This, of course, implies using exceptions everywhere because
you /can't/ use that model in C++ without them.[5]

Again, I think that the existing XEmacs model will probably work well
with this, but I am hardly an expert at either; my only real-world
experience is the one project where I gained these impressions and the
knowledge of the suffering they can bring. :)


Oh, and finally, watch out for operator overloading -- including casts.
These are very easy to abuse into a position where your code is
impossible for others to understand.

I would also advocate avoiding multiple inheritance, but that's because
my personal design experience says that it's almost always a sign of bad
design. Views there vary greatly.

> I do worry that with Martin currently out of the picture we don't have
> an active C++ standards bigot and implementation collector to deal
> with compiler-specific issues.  

You probably have more need of the second than the first. There are not
many things you actually need a standards bigot for; just write good C
and don't use too many things other than classes.

> We do OK with C, but C++ is a much more complex, subtle language. 

C with classes, or the limited subset of C++ that doesn't include
templates, exceptions or RTTI is not much more complex than standard C.

If you add exceptions to that you will probably not notice anything but
a syntax change in the core, given their current standing. Er, they
probably don't work right in signal handlers, though, because they don't
know anything about them.[6]

> Is there anybody else to plausibly take on that role?

I would be happy to look at things that were publicly discussed on the
topic but I don't think I have the experience or the knowledge of the
XEmacs development process to do anything more than that.

Not, I imagine, that anyone would ask. :)

        Daniel

Footnotes: 
[1]  Archaic Unix ported to i386 from a minicomputer over a decade ago.

[2]  The vendor C++ would segfault on anything that had multiple
     inheritance. :)

[3]  I found them invaluable in resolving a few Win9x vn WinNT symbol
     conflicts, for example, but that's obviously target-specific.

[4]  The current record for STL-generated name length that I have seen
     is a symbol 892 characters long...

[5]  The lack of a return code from a class constructor is the killer
     issue here.

[6]  This, I believe, varies from vendor to vendor. :)


@node Discussion -- Windows External Widget, Discussion -- Packages, Discussion -- Switching to C++, Future Work Discussion
@section Discussion -- Windows External Widget
@cindex discussion, windows external widget
@cindex windows external widget, discussion

@example

Subject: 
            Re: External Widget Support for Xemacs on nt
       Date: 
            Sat, 08 Jul 2000 01:47:14 -0700
      From: 
            Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
        To: 
            Timothy.Fowler@@msdw.com
        CC: 
            xemacs-nt@@xemacs.org
 References: 
            1




Nothing is currently done for external widget support under XEmacs but
it should not be too hard to do and would be a great addition to
XEmacs. What you would probably want to do is create an XEmacs control
that has an interface something like the built-in edit control and
which communicates to an existing XEmacs process using DDE. (Basically
you would modify XEmacs so that it registered itself as a DDE server
accepting external widget requests, and then the external edit control
would simply send a DDE request and the result would be a handle of
some sort used for future communication with that particular XEmacs
process.)

There are two basic issues in getting the external widget to work,
which are display and input. Although I am not completely sure, I have
a feeling that it is possible for one process to write into the window
of another process, simply by using that window's HWND handle. If so
it should be extremely easy to get the output working (this is exactly
the approach used under Xt). For input, you would probably again want
to do what is done under Xt, which is that the client widget simply
passes all of the appropriate messages to the XEmacs server process
using whatever communication channel was set up, e.g. DDE, and the
XEmacs server processes them normally. Very few modifications would be
needed to the XEmacs source code and all of the necessary
modifications could be done simply by looking for existing external
widget code in XEmacs.

If you are interested in continuing this, I will certainly give you
any support you need along the way. This would be a great project to
be added to XEmacs.



Timothy Fowler wrote:

> I am looking into external widget support for xemacs nt similar to that
> existing in xemacs for X
> Have any developement efforts been made in this direction in the past?
> Is there any current effort?
> Any insight into the complexity of achieving this?
> Any comments would be greatly appreciated
> Thanks
> Tim Fowler

--
Ben

In order to save my hands, I am cutting back on my mail.  I also write
as succinctly as possible -- please don't be offended.  If you send me
mail, you _will_ get a response, but please be patient, especially for
XEmacs-related mail.  If you need an immediate response and it is not
apparent in your message, please say so.  Thanks for your understanding.

See also http://www.666.com/ben/chronic-pain/


Subject: 
        RE: External Widget Support for Xemacs on nt
   Date: 
        Mon, 10 Jul 2000 12:40:01 +0100
   From: 
        "Alastair J. Houghton" <ajhoughton@@lineone.net>
     To: 
        "Ben Wing" <ben@@666.com>, <xemacs-nt@@xemacs.org>
    CC: 
        <Timothy.Fowler@@msdw.com>




> -----Original Message-----
> From: owner-xemacs-nt@@xemacs.org [mailto:owner-xemacs-nt@@xemacs.org]On
> Behalf Of Ben Wing
> Sent: 08 July 2000 09:47
> To: Timothy.Fowler@@msdw.com
> Cc: xemacs-nt@@xemacs.org
> Subject: Re: External Widget Support for Xemacs on nt
> 
> Nothing is currently done for external widget support under 
> XEmacs but it should
> not be too hard to do and would be a great addition to XEmacs. 
> What you would
> probably want to do is create an XEmacs control that has an 
> interface something
> like the built-in edit control and which communicates to an 
> existing XEmacs
> process using DDE.

It would be @strong{much} better to use RPC or COM rather than DDE - and
also it would provide a more useful interface to XEmacs (like the
Microsoft rich text edit control that is used by Wordpad). It
would probably also be easier...

> If you are interested in continuing this, I will certainly give 
> you any support
> you need along the way. This would be a great project to be added 
> to XEmacs.

I agree. This would be a *really useful* thing to do...

Regards,

Alastair.

____________________________________________________________
Alastair Houghton                     ajhoughton@@lineone.net 

Subject: 
            Re: External Widget Support for Xemacs on nt
       Date: 
            Mon, 10 Jul 2000 22:56:06 -0700
      From: 
            Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
        To: 
            "Alastair J. Houghton" <ajhoughton@@lineone.net>
        CC: 
            xemacs-nt@@xemacs.org, Timothy.Fowler@@msdw.com
 References: 
            1




sounds good.  i don't know too much about windows ipc methods, so i suggested
dde just as an example.

"Alastair J. Houghton" wrote:

> > -----Original Message-----
> > From: owner-xemacs-nt@@xemacs.org [mailto:owner-xemacs-nt@@xemacs.org]On
> > Behalf Of Ben Wing
> > Sent: 08 July 2000 09:47
> > To: Timothy.Fowler@@msdw.com
> > Cc: xemacs-nt@@xemacs.org
> > Subject: Re: External Widget Support for Xemacs on nt
> >
> > Nothing is currently done for external widget support under
> > XEmacs but it should
> > not be too hard to do and would be a great addition to XEmacs.
> > What you would
> > probably want to do is create an XEmacs control that has an
> > interface something
> > like the built-in edit control and which communicates to an
> > existing XEmacs
> > process using DDE.
>
> It would be @strong{much} better to use RPC or COM rather than DDE - and
> also it would provide a more useful interface to XEmacs (like the
> Microsoft rich text edit control that is used by Wordpad). It
> would probably also be easier...
>
> > If you are interested in continuing this, I will certainly give
> > you any support
> > you need along the way. This would be a great project to be added
> > to XEmacs.
>
> I agree. This would be a *really useful* thing to do...
>
> Regards,
>
> Alastair.
>
> ____________________________________________________________
> Alastair Houghton                     ajhoughton@@lineone.net

--
Ben

In order to save my hands, I am cutting back on my mail.  I also write
as succinctly as possible -- please don't be offended.  If you send me
mail, you _will_ get a response, but please be patient, especially for
XEmacs-related mail.  If you need an immediate response and it is not
apparent in your message, please say so.  Thanks for your understanding.

See also http://www.666.com/ben/chronic-pain/

@end example


@node Discussion -- Packages, Discussion -- Distribution Layout, Discussion -- Windows External Widget, Future Work Discussion
@section Discussion -- Packages
@cindex discussion, packages
@cindex packages, discussion

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@subheading Important package-related changes

This file details changes that make the package system no longer an
unmitigated disaster.  This way, at the very least, people can
essentially ignore the package system and not get bitten horribly the
way they currently do.  

@enumerate
@item
A single tarball containing absolutely everything and named
xemacs-21.2.68.tar.gz.  This must contain absolutely everything,
including all of the packages, and in the proper directory
structure, so that the paradigm for 

untar; configure; make; make install

just works.

@item
Fixed startup slowdown when all packages are installed so that
there is absolutely no penalty to having them all installed.  This
may be hard.

@item
All files on the ftp site should be accessible through http.

@item
Put symlinks into the distribution directory to the appropriate
files in the package directory.

@item
Eliminate the confusing SUMO name, choosing a much more obvious
name such as all-packages.  

@item
There should be no separation of mule and non-mule packages.

@item
Having 2 packages that conflict with each other should be
completely disallowed.

@item
Fix vc and ps-print so that there is only ONE version.

@item
Fix up all of the READMEs on the distribution site to make it
abundantly clear what needs to be obtained, where to get it, and
how to install it, especially with regards to packages.
@end enumerate

@node Discussion -- Distribution Layout,  , Discussion -- Packages, Future Work Discussion
@section Discussion -- Distribution Layout
@cindex discussion, distribution layout
@cindex distribution layout, discussion


@example
From: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
                                                     10/15/1999 8:50 PM

 Subject:
        VOTE: Absolutely necessary changes to file naming in releases
     To: 
        SL Baur <steve@@xemacs.org>,
        XEmacs Reviews <xemacs-review@@xemacs.org>




Everybody except Steve seems to agree that we need to provide a single
tar file containing the entire XEmacs tree whenever we release a new
version of XEmacs (beta or not).  Therefore I propose the following
simple changes, and ask for a vote.  If it is the general will of the
developers, then Steve @strong{WILL} make these changes.  This is the
definition of cooperative development -- no one, not even the
maintainer, can assert absolute power over anything.

I propose (assuming, for example, release 21.2.20):

1. xemacs-21.2.20.tar.gz -> xemacs-21.2.20-core.tar.gz

2. xemacs-sumo.tar.gz -> xemacs-packages.tar.gz

3. xemacs-mule-sumo.tar.gz -> xemacs-mule-packages.tar.gz

4. Symlinks to the files mentioned in #2 and #3 get created in the SAME
directory as xemacs-21.2.20-*.tar.gz.

5. MOST IMPORTANTLY, a new file xemacs-21.2.20.tar.gz gets created,
which is the combination of the 5 files xemacs-21.2.20-core.tar.gz,
xemacs-21.2.20-elc.tar.gz, xemacs-21.2.20-info.tar.gz,
xemacs-packages.tar.gz, and xemacs-mule-packages.tar.gz.


The directory structure of the new combined file xemacs-21.2.20.tar.gz
would look like this:

xemacs-21.2.20/
xemacs-packages/
xemacs-mule-packages/


I am sorry to shout, but the current situation is just completely
insane.

ben






From: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
                                                    10/16/1999 3:12 AM

 Subject:
        Re: VOTE: Absolutely necessary changes to file naming in releases
     To: 
        SL Baur <steve@@xemacs.org>,
        XEmacs Reviews <xemacs-review@@xemacs.org>,
        "Michael Sperber [Mr. Preprocessor]" <sperber@@informatik.uni-tuebingen.de>




Something went wrong with my mail program while I was responding, so
Michael's response is not quoted here.

Let me rephrase my proposal, stressing the important points in order of
importance:

1. MOST IMPORTANT: There MUST be a SINGLE tar file containing the complete
XEmacs sources, packages, etc.  The name of this tar file must have a
format like this:

xemacs-21.2.10.tar.gz

The directory layout of the packages within it is not important as long as
it works: The user who downloads the tar file MUST be able to apply the
'configure; make; make install' paradigm at the top-level directory and
have it work properly.

2. All the pieces of XEmacs must be in the @strong{same} subdirectory on the FTP
site.

3. The names need to be obvious and standard.  Naming the core files
"xemacs-21.2.20.tar.gz" is non-standard because those are only the core
files.  The standard followed by everybody in the world is that a name like
this refers to the entire product, with all ancillary files.  Also, "sumo",
although a nice in-joke, is extremely confusing and needs to go.

Referring to Michael's point about the layout I proposed, I also think that
the package system needs to be modified to accept a layout produced by the
"obvious" way of obtaining and untarring the parts, which leaves you with a
directory consisting of

xemacs-21.2.19/
xemacs-packages/
mule-packages/

All at the same level.  However, this is an independent issue from the vote
at hand.


Consider the current insanity.  The new XEmacs user or beta tester goes to
the FTP site, looks around, finds the file xemacs-21.2.19.tar.gz, and
downloads it, because it looks like the obvious one to get.  But it doesn't
work.  Oops ...  He looks some more and finds the other two -elc and -info
parts, grabs them, and then tries again.  But it still doesn't work.  He
manages to overhear something about packages, so he looks for them, but
doesn't find them immediately (they're not even in the beta tree, though
they obviously contain beta-level code, especially in xemacs-base and
mule-base).  Eventually he discovers the package/ subdirectory, but what
the hell does he do there?  There's no README at all there giving any
clues, so he downloads everything.  Along with this, he gets some files
called "sumo", which he doesn't understand, but he notices that some of
them are extremely large.  "sumo" ... "large" ...  hehe, I get it.  Some
silly developer's joke.  But then he tries again to compile things, and
just can't figure things out.  He still doesn't know:

-- "sumo" is not just some large file, but is a tar file of all the
packages.
-- The packages can't be placed is any subdirectory in any obvious relation
to the XEmacs directory ("straight out of the box" if you manage to grok
the significance of the sumo files, you get a layout like

xemacs-21.2.19/
xemacs-packages/
mule-packages/

which naturally doesn't work!  He needs to put them underneath
xemacs-21.2.19/lib/xemacs/ or something.)

At this point, he gives up, and (if he was a user of a pre-packagized
XEmacs) wonders in despair how things got so messed up, when all older
XEmacs releases, including all the betas, followed the standard "configure;
make; make install" paradigm).



Soooooo .........  PLEASE vote on issues #1-3 above, and add any comments
you feel like adding.

ben

Ben Wing wrote:

> Everybody except Steve seems to agree that we need to provide a single
> tar file containing the entire XEmacs tree whenever we release a new
> version of XEmacs (beta or not).  Therefore I propose the following
> simple changes, and ask for a vote.  If it is the general will of the
> developers, then Steve @strong{WILL} make these changes.  This is the
> definition of cooperative development -- no one, not even the
> maintainer, can assert absolute power over anything.
>
> I propose (assuming, for example, release 21.2.20):
>
> 1. xemacs-21.2.20.tar.gz -> xemacs-21.2.20-core.tar.gz
>
> 2. xemacs-sumo.tar.gz -> xemacs-packages.tar.gz
>
> 3. xemacs-mule-sumo.tar.gz -> xemacs-mule-packages.tar.gz
>
> 4. Symlinks to the files mentioned in #2 and #3 get created in the SAME
> directory as xemacs-21.2.20-*.tar.gz.
>
> 5. MOST IMPORTANTLY, a new file xemacs-21.2.20.tar.gz gets created,
> which is the combination of the 5 files xemacs-21.2.20-core.tar.gz,
> xemacs-21.2.20-elc.tar.gz, xemacs-21.2.20-info.tar.gz,
> xemacs-packages.tar.gz, and xemacs-mule-packages.tar.gz.
>
> The directory structure of the new combined file xemacs-21.2.20.tar.gz
> would look like this:
>
> xemacs-21.2.20/
> xemacs-packages/
> xemacs-mule-packages/
>
> I am sorry to shout, but the current situation is just completely
> insane.
>
> ben



From: 
        Ben Wing <ben@@666.com>
                                                     12/6/1999 4:19 AM

 Subject:
        Re: Please Vote on Proposals
     To: 
        Kyle Jones <kyle_jones@@wonderworks.com>
    CC: 
        XEmacs Review <xemacs-review@@xemacs.org>




OK Kyle, how about a different proposal:

1. The distribution consists of the following three parts (let's assume
v21.2.25):

-- xemacs-21.2.25-core.tar.gz
   The same as would currently in xemacs-21.2.25.tar.gz.  You can
   run this editor and edit in fundamental mode, but not do anything
else.

-- xemacs-21.2.25-core-packages.tar.gz
   A useful and complete subset of all the possible packages.  Selection
of
   what goes in and what goes out is based partially on consensus,
partially
   on vote, and partially on these criteria:

    -- commonly-used packages go in.
    -- unmaintained or out-of-date packages go out.
    -- buggy, poorly-written packages go out.
    -- really obscure packages that hardly anybody could possibly care
       about go out.
    -- when there are two or three packages implementing basically the
       same functionality, pick only one to go in unless there are two
that
       both are really commonly-used.
    -- if a package can be loaded implicitly as a result of something in
the
       core, it needs to go in, regardless of whether it's been
maintained.
       This applies, for example, to the mode files -- @strong{all} mode
packages must
       go in (or more properly, every mode must have a corresponding
package
       that's in, although if there are two or more packages implementing
a
       particular mode, e.g. html, we are free to choose just one).

-- xemacs-21.2.25-aux-packages.tar.gz
   All of the packages not in the previous file.  Generally
crappy-quality,
   poorly-maintained code.

Note, we do not make distinctions between Mule and non-Mule in our
packaging scheme -- this is a bug and XEmacs and/or the packages should
be fixed up so that this goes away.

2. The distribution also contains two combination files:

-- xemacs-21.2.25.tar.gz
   This is the "default" file that a naive user ought to retrieve, and
   he'll get a running XEmacs, just like he wants, and comfortable, too,
   because all of the common packages are there.  This file is a
combination
   of xemacs-21.2.25-core.tar.gz and xemacs-21.2.25-core-packages.tar.gz.

-- xemacs-21.2.25-everything.tar.gz
   This file contains absolutely everything, like it advertises --
   including the aux packages and all of their associated crappy-quality,

   unmaintained code.  This file is a combination of
xemacs-21.2.25-core.tar.gz,
   xemacs-21.2.25-core-packages.tar.gz, and
xemacs-21.2.25-aux-packages.tar.gz.


I like this proposal better than the previous one I advocated, because it
follows your good suggestion of separating the wheat from the chaff in
the packages, so to speak.  People will grab xemacs-21.2.25.tar.gz by
default, just like they should,
and they'll get something they're quite happy with, and we're happy
because we can exercise quality control over the packages and exclude the
crappy ones most likely to cause grief later on.


What say y'all?

ben



Kyle Jones wrote:

> Ben Wing writes:
>  > Disagree.  Please let's follow everyone else's convention, and not
>  > introduce yet another randomness.
>
> It is not randomness! I think this is a semantic issue and an
> important one.  The issue is: What do we consider part of XEmacs
> and what is considered external to XEmacs.  If you put all the
> packages in xemacs.tar.gz, then users can reasonably and wrongly
> assume that all this random Lisp code is maintained by us.  We
> are trying to stay away from that model because in the past it has
> left us with piles and piles of orphaned code.  Even if every one
> of us were paid to maintain XEmacs, it is just not practical for
> us to continue to maintain all that code, let alone any new code.
> So I think the naming distinction Jan is making is worth doing.
>
> Also, I don't consider the current situation broken, except
> perhaps the sumo tarball being out of date.  I never, ever,
> though it was a great idea to ship all the stuff that XEacs
> shipped in the old days.  Because this pile of code was always
> around in the distribution, an enormous web of undocumented
> dependencies was constructed.  Eventually, you HAD to install
> everything because if you left something out or removed something
> you never knew when XEmacs would throw an error.  Thus the Cult
> of the Cargo was born.
>
> One of the best things that came out of the package system was
> the month or two we spent running XEmacs without all the assorted
> Lisp installed.  Dependencies were removed or documented, some
> stuff got retired, and for the first time we actually had a full
> accounting of what we were shipping.  I currently run XEmacs with
> 7 packages and I don't miss the other stuff.
>
> Having come this far, I do not think we should go back to
> advocating that everyone just install everything and not
> think about they are doing.  Besides saving space and startup
> time, another reason to not install everything is that you
> won't bloat your XEmacs process nearly as much if you go
> exploring in the Custom menus, because there won't be as much
> Lisp loaded as Custom sets up its groups and whatnot.

--
In order to save my hands, I am cutting back on my responses, especially
to XEmacs-related mail.  You _will_ get a response, but please be
patient.
If you need an immediate response and it is not apparent in your message,

please say so.  Thanks for your understanding.
@end example

@node Old Future Work, Index, Future Work Discussion, Top
@chapter Old Future Work
@cindex old future work
@cindex future work, old

This chapter includes proposals for future work that were later
implemented.  These proposals are included because they may describe to
some extent the actual workings of the implemented code, and because
they may discuss relevant design issues, alternative implementations, or
work still to be done.

@menu
* Old Future Work -- A Portable Unexec Replacement::  
* Old Future Work -- Indirect Buffers::  
* Old Future Work -- Improvements in support for non-ASCII (European) keysyms under X::  
* Old Future Work -- RTF Clipboard Support::  
* Old Future Work -- xemacs.org Mailing Address Changes::  
* Old Future Work -- Lisp callbacks from critical areas of the C code::  
@end menu

@node Old Future Work -- A Portable Unexec Replacement, Old Future Work -- Indirect Buffers, Old Future Work, Old Future Work
@section Old Future Work -- A Portable Unexec Replacement
@cindex old future work, a portable unexec replacement
@cindex a portable unexec replacement, old future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@strong{Abstract:} Currently, during the build stage of XEmacs, a bare
version of the program (called @dfn{temacs}) is run, which loads up a
bunch of Lisp data and then writes out a modified executable file.  This
process is very tricky to implement and highly system-dependent.  It can
be replaced by a simple, mostly portable, and easy to implement scheme
where the Lisp data is written out to a separate data file.

The scheme makes only three assumptions about the memory layout of a
running XEmacs process, which, as far as I know, are met by all current
implementations of XEmacs (and they're also requirements of the existing
unexec scheme):

@enumerate
@item

The initialized data segments of the various XEmacs modules are all laid
out contiguously in memory and are separated from the initialized data
segments of libraries that are linked with XEmacs; likewise for
uninitialized data segments.
@item

The beginning and end of the XEmacs portion of the combined initialized
data segment can be programmatically determined; likewise for the
uninitialized data segment.
@item

The XEmacs portion of the initialized and uninitialized data segments
are always loaded at the same place in memory.

@end enumerate

Assumption number three means that this scheme is non-relocatable, which
is a disadvantage as compared to other, relocatable schemes that have
been proposed.  However, the advantage of this scheme over them is that
it is much easier to implement and requires minimal changes to the
XEmacs code base.

First, let's go over the theory behind the dumping mechanism.  The
principles that we would like to follow are:

@enumerate
@item

We write out to disk all of the data structures and all of their
sub-structures that we have created ourselves, except for data that is
expected to change from invocation to invocation (in particular, data
that is extracted from the external environment at run time).
@item

We don't write out to disk any data structures created or initialized by
system libraries, by the kernel or by any other code that we didn't
create ourselves, because we can't count on that code working in the way
that we want it to.
@item

At the beginning of the next invocation of our program, we read in all
those data structures that we have written out to disk, and then
continue as if we had just created and initialized all of that data
ourselves.
@item

We make sure that our own data structures don't have any pointers to
system data, or if they do, that we note all of these pointers so that
we can re-create the system data and set up pointers to the data again
in the next invocation.
@item

During the next invocation of our program, we re-create all of our own
data structures that are derived from the external environment.

@end enumerate

XEmacs, of course, is already set up to adhere to most of these
principles.

In fact, the current dumping process that we are replacing does a few of
these principles slightly differently and adds a few extra of its own:

@enumerate
@item

All data structures of all sorts, including system data, are written
out.  This is the cause of no end of problems, and it is avoidable,
because we can ensure that our own data and the system data are
physically separated in memory.
@item

Our own data structures that we derive from the external environment are
in fact written out and read in, but then are simply overwritten during
the next invocation with new data.  Before dumping, we make sure to free
any such data structure that would cause memory leaks.
@item

XEmacs carefully arranges things so that all static variables in the
initialized data are never written to after the dumping stage has
completed.  This allows for an additional optimization in which we can
make static initialized data segments in pre-dumped invocations of
XEmacs be read-only and shared among all XEmacs processes on a single
machine.

@end enumerate

The difficult part in this process is figuring out where our data
structures lie in memory so that we can correctly write them out and
read them back in.  The trick that we use to make this problem solvable
is to ensure that the heap that is used for all dynamically allocated
data structures that are created during the dumping process is located
inside the memory of a large, statically declared array.  This ensures
that all of our own data structures are contained (at least at the time
that we dump out our data) inside the static initialized and
uninitialized data segments, which are physically separated in memory
from any data treated by system libraries and whose starting and ending
points are known and unchanging (we know that all of these things are
true because we require them to be so, as preconditions of being able to
make use of this method of dumping).

In order to implement this method of heap allocation, we change the
memory allocation function that we use for our own data.  (It's
extremely important that this function not be used to allocate system
data.  This means that we must not redefine the @code{malloc} function
using the linker, but instead we need to achieve this using the C
preprocessor, or by simply using a different name, such as
@code{xmalloc}.  It's also very important that we use the correct
@code{free} function when freeing dynamically-allocated data, depending
on whether this data was allocated by us or by the

@node Old Future Work -- Indirect Buffers, Old Future Work -- Improvements in support for non-ASCII (European) keysyms under X, Old Future Work -- A Portable Unexec Replacement, Old Future Work
@section Old Future Work -- Indirect Buffers
@cindex old future work, indirect buffers
@cindex indirect buffers, old future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

An indirect buffer is a buffer that shares its text with some other
buffer, but has its own version of all of the buffer properties,
including markers, extents, buffer local variables, etc.  Indirect
buffers are not currently implemented in XEmacs, but they are in GNU
Emacs, and some people have asked for this feature.  I consider this
feature somewhat extent-related because much of the work required to
implement this feature involves tracking extents properly.

In a world with indirect buffers, some buffers are direct, and some
buffers are indirect.  This only matters when there is more than one
buffer sharing the same text.  In such a case, one of the buffers can be
considered the canonical buffer for the text in question.  This buffer
is a direct buffer, and all buffers sharing the text are indirect
buffers.  These two kinds of buffers are created differently.  One of
them is created simply using the @code{make_buffer()} function (or
perhaps the @code{Fget_buffer_create()} function), and the other kind is
created using the @code{make_indirect_buffer()} function, which takes
another buffer as an argument which specifies the text of the indirect
buffer being created.  Every indirect buffer keeps track of the direct
buffer that is its parent, and every direct buffer keeps a list of all
of its indirect buffer children.  This list is modified as buffers are
created and deleted.  Because buffers are permanent objects, there is no
special garbage collection-related trickery involved in these parent and
children pointers.  There should never be an indirect buffer whose
parent is also an indirect buffer.  If the user attempts to set up such
a situation using @code{make_indirect_buffer()}, either an error should
be signaled or the parent of the indirect buffer should automatically
become the direct buffer that actually is responsible for the text.
Deleting a direct buffer should perhaps cause all of the indirect buffer
children to be deleted automatically.  There should be Lisp functions
for determining whether a buffer is direct or indirect, and other
functions for retrieving the parents, or the children of the buffer,
depending on which is appropriate.  (The scheme being described here is
similar to symbolic links.  Another possible scheme would be analogous
to hard links, and would make no distinction between direct and indirect
buffers.  In that case, the text of the buffer logically exists as an
object separate from the buffer itself and only goes away when the last
buffer pointing to this text is deleted.)

Other than keeping track of parent and child pointer, the only remaining
thing required to implement indirect buffers is to ensure that changes
to the text of the buffer trigger the same sorts of effect in all the
buffers that share that text.  Luckily there are only three functions in
XEmacs that actually make changes to the text of the buffer, and they
are all located in the file @code{insdel.c}.

These three functions are called @code{buffer_insert_string_1()},
@code{buffer_delete_range()}, and @code{buffer_replace_char()}.  All of
the subfunctions called by these functions are also in @code{insdel.c}.

The first thing that each of these three functions needs to do is check
to see if its buffer argument is an indirect buffer, and if so, convert
it to the indirect buffer's parent.  Once that is done, the functions
need to be modified so that all of the things they do, other than
actually changing the buffers text, such as calling
before-change-functions and after-change-functions, and updating extents
and markers, need to be done over all of the buffers that are indirect
children of the buffers being modified; as well as, of course, for the
buffer itself.  Each step in the process needs to be iterated for all of
the buffers in question before proceeding to the next step.  For
example, in @code{buffer_insert_string_1()},
@code{prepare_to_modify_buffer()} needs to be called in turn, for all of
the buffers sharing the text being modified.  Then the text itself is
modified, then @code{insert_invalidate_line_number_cache()} is called
for all of the buffers, then @code{record_insert()} is called for all of
the buffers, etc.  Essentially, the operation is being done on all of
the buffers in parallel, rather than each buffer being processed in
series.  This is necessary because many of the steps can quit or call
Lisp code and each step depends on the previous step, and some steps are
done only once, rather than on each buffer.  I imagine it would be
significantly easier to implement this, if a macro were created for
iterating over a buffer, and then all of the indirect children of that
buffer.

@node Old Future Work -- Improvements in support for non-ASCII (European) keysyms under X, Old Future Work -- RTF Clipboard Support, Old Future Work -- Indirect Buffers, Old Future Work
@section Old Future Work -- Improvements in support for non-ASCII (European) keysyms under X
@cindex old future work, improvements in support for non-ascii (european) keysyms under x
@cindex improvements in support for non-ascii (european) keysyms under x, old future work

Author: @uref{mailto:martin@@xemacs.org,Martin Buchholz}

If a user has a keyboard with known standard non-ASCII character
equivalents, typically for European users, then Emacs' default
binding should be self-insert-command, with the obvious character
inserted.   For example, if a user has a keyboard with

xmodmap -e "keycode 54 = scaron"

then pressing that key on the keyboard will insert the (Latin-2)
character corresponding to "scaron" into the buffer.

Note: Emacs 20.6 does NOTHING when pressing such a key (not even an
error), i.e. even (read-event) ignores this key, which means it can't
even be bound to anything by a user trying to customize it.

This is implemented by maintaining a table of translations between all
the known X keysym names and the corresponding (charset, octet) pairs.

@quotation
   For every key on the keyboard that has a known character correspondence,
   we define the character-of-keysym property of the keysym, and make the
   default binding for the key be self-insert-command.

   The following magic is basically intimate knowledge of X11/keysymdef.h.
   The keysym mappings defined by X11 are based on the iso8859 standards,
   except for Cyrillic and Greek.

   In a non-Mule world, a user can still have a multi-lingual editor, by doing
   (set-face-font "...-iso8859-2" (current-buffer))
   for all their Latin-2 buffers, etc.
@end quotation

@node Old Future Work -- RTF Clipboard Support, Old Future Work -- xemacs.org Mailing Address Changes, Old Future Work -- Improvements in support for non-ASCII (European) keysyms under X, Old Future Work
@section Old Future Work -- RTF Clipboard Support
@cindex old future work, RTF clipboard support
@cindex RTF clipboard support, old future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

in fact, i merged the windows stuff with the already-existing generic code.

what i'd like to see is something like this:

@enumerate
@item
The current function

@example
(defun own-selection (data &optional type append)
@end example

should become

@example
(defun own-selection (data &optional type how-to-add data-type)
@end example

where data-type is the mswindows format, and how-to-add is

@example
'replace-all or nil -- remove data for all formats
'replace-existing -- remove data for DATA-TYPE, but leave other formats alone
'append or t -- append data to existing data in DATA-TYPE, and leave other
formats alone
@end example

@item
the function

@example
(get-selection &optional TYPE DATA-TYPE)
@end example

already has a data-type so you don't need to change it.

@item
the existing function

@example
(selection-exists-p &optional SELECTION DEVICE)
@end example

should become

@example
(selection-exists-p &optional SELECTION DEVICE DATA-TYPE)
@end example

@item
a new function

@example
(register-selection-data-type DATA-TYPE)
@end example

like your mswindows-register-clipboard-format.

@item
there's already a selection-converter-alist, but that's only for data out.
you should alias it to selection-conversion-out-alist, and create
selection-conversion-in-alist.  these alists contain entries for CF_TEXT, which
handles CR/LF conversion, and rtf, which does rtf in/out conversion -- no need
for separate functions to do this.

this may seem daunting, but it's much less hard to add stuff like this than it
seems, and i and others will certainly give you lots of support if you run into
problems.  it would be way cool to have a more powerful clipboard mechanism in
XEmacs.
@end enumerate

@node Old Future Work -- xemacs.org Mailing Address Changes, Old Future Work -- Lisp callbacks from critical areas of the C code, Old Future Work -- RTF Clipboard Support, Old Future Work
@section Old Future Work -- xemacs.org Mailing Address Changes
@cindex old future work, xemacs.org mailing address changes
@cindex xemacs.org mailing address changes, old future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

@subheading Personal addresses

@enumerate
@item

Everyone who is contributing or has ever contributed code to the XEmacs
core, or to any of the packages archived at xemacs.org, even if they
don't actually have an account on any machine at xemacs.org. In fact,
all of these people should have two mailing addresses at xemacs.org, one
of which is their actual login name (or potential login name if they
were ever to have an account), and the other one is in the form of first
name/last name, similar to the way things are done at Sun.  For example,
Martin would have two addresses at xemacs.org, @code{martin@@xemacs.org},
and @code{martin.buchholz@@xemacs.org}, with the latter one simply being
an alias for the former.  The idea is that in all cases, if you simply
know the name of any past or present contributor to XEmacs, and you want
to mail them, you will know immediately how to do this without having to
do any complicated searching on the Web or in XEmacs documentation.
@item

Furthermore, I think that all of the email addresses mentioned anywhere
in the XEmacs source code or documentation should be changed to be the
corresponding ones at xemacs.org, instead of any other email addresses
that any contributors might have.
@item

All the places in the source code where a contributor's name is
mentioned, but no email addressed is attached, should be found, and the
correct xemacs.org address should be attached.
@item

The alias file mapping people's addresses at xemacs.org to their actual
addresses elsewhere (in the case, as will be true for the majority of
addresses, where the contributor does not actually have an account at
xemacs.org, but simply a forwarding pointer), should be viewable on the
xemacs.org web site through a CGI script that reads the alias file and
turns it into an HTML table.

@end enumerate

@subheading Package addresses

I also think that for every package archived at xemacs.org, there should
be three corresponding email addresses at xemacs.org.  For example,
consider a package such as @code{lazy-shot}.  The addresses associated
with this package would be:

@table @code
@item lazy-shot@@xemacs.org
This is a discussion mailing list about the @code{lazy-shot} package,
and it should be controlled by Majordomo in the standard fashion.
@item lazy-shot-patches@@xemacs.org
This is where patches to the @code{lazy-shot} package are set.  This
should go to various people who are interested in such patches.  For
example, the maintainer of @code{lazy-shot}, perhaps the maintainer of
XEmacs itself, and probably to other people who have volunteered to do
code review for this package, or for a larger group of packages that
this package is in.  Perhaps this list should also be maintained by
Majordomo.
@item lazy-shot-maintainer@@xemacs.org
This address is for mailing the maintainer directly.  It is possible
that this will go to more than one person.  This would particularly be
the case, for example, if the maintainer is dormant or does not appear
very responsive to patches.  In this case, the address would also point
to someone like Steve, who is acting in the maintainer's stead, and who
will himself apply patches or make other changes to the package as
maintained in the CVS archive on xemacs.org.
@end table

It may take a bit of work to track down the current addresses for the
various package maintainers, and may in general seem like a lot of work
to set up all of these mail addresses, but I think it's very important
to make it as easy as possible for random XEmacs users to be able to
submit patches and report bugs in an orderly fashion.  The general idea
that I'm striving for is to create as much momentum as possible in the
XEmacs development community, and I think having the system of mail
addresses set up will make it much easier for this momentum to be built
up and to remain.

@uref{../../www.666.com/ben/default.htm,Ben Wing}

@node Old Future Work -- Lisp callbacks from critical areas of the C code,  , Old Future Work -- xemacs.org Mailing Address Changes, Old Future Work
@section Old Future Work -- Lisp callbacks from critical areas of the C code
@cindex old future work, lisp callbacks from critical areas of the c code
@cindex lisp callbacks from critical areas of the c code, old future work

Author: @uref{mailto:ben@@xemacs.org,Ben Wing}

There are many places in the XEmacs C code where Lisp functions are
called, usually because the Lisp function is acting as a callback,
hook, process filter, or the like.  The lisp code is often called in
places where some lisp operations are dangerous.  Currently there are
a lot of ad-hoc schemes implemented to try to prevent these dangerous
operations from causing problems.  I've added a lot of them myself,
for example, the @code{call*_trapping_errors()} functions.  Other places,
such as the pre-gc- and post-gc-hooks, do their own ad hoc processing.
I'm proposing a scheme that would generalize all of this ad hoc code
and allow Lisp code to be called in all sorts of sensitive areas of
the C code, including even within redisplay.

Basically, we define a set of operations that are disallowable because
they are dangerous.  We essentially assign a bit flag to all of these
operations.  Whenever any sensitive C code wants to call Lisp code,
instead of using the standard call* functions, it uses a new set of
functions, call*_critical, which takes an extra parameter, which is a
bit mask specifying the set of operations which are disallowed.  The
basic operations of these functions is simply to set a global variable
corresponding to the bit mask (more specifically, the functions store
the previous value of this global variable in an unwind_protect, and
use bitwise-or to combine the previous value with the new bit mask
that was passed in).  (Actually, we should first implement a slightly
lower level function which is called @code{enter_sensitive_code_section()},
which simply sets up the global variable and the @code{unwind_protect()}, and
returns a @code{specbind()} value, but doesn't actually call any Lisp code.
There is a corresponding function @code{exit_sensitive_code_section()}, which
takes the specbind value as an argument, and unwinds the
unwind_protect.  The call*_sensitive functions are trivially
implemented in terms of these lower level functions.)

Corresponding to each of these entries is the C name of the bit flag.

The sets of dangerous operations which can be prohibited are:

@table @code
@item OPERATION_GC_PROHIBITED
garbage collection.  When this flag is set, and the garbage
collection threshold is reached, garbage collection simply doesn't
happen.  It will happen at the next opportunity that it is allowed.
Similarly, explicitly calling the Lisp function garbage-collect
simply does nothing.

@item OPERATION_CATCH_ERRORS
signalling an error.  When @code{enter_sensitive_code_section()} is
called, with the bit flag corresponding to this prohibited
operation.  When this bit flag is passed to
@code{enter_sensitive_code_section()}, a catch is set up which catches all
errors, signals a warning with @code{warn_when_safe()}, and then simply
continues.  This is exactly the same behavior you now get with the
@code{call_*_trapping_errors()} functions.  (there should also be some way
of specifying a warning level and class here, similar to the
@code{call_*_trapping_errors()} functions.  This is not completely
important, however, because a standard warning level and class
could simply be chosen.)

@item OPERATION_NO_UNSAFE_OBJECT_DELETION
This flag prohibits deletion of any permanent object (i.e. any
object that does not automatically disappear when created, such as
buffers, frames, devices, windows, etc...) unless they were created
after this bit flag was set.  This would be implemented using a
list which stores all of the permanent objects created after this
bit flag was set.  This list is reset to its previous value when
the call to @code{exit_sensitive_code_section()} occurs.  The motivation
here is to allow Lisp callbacks to create their own temporary
buffers or frames, and later delete them, but not allow any other
permanent objects to be deleted, because C code might be working
with them, and not expect them to change.

@item OPERATION_NO_BUFFER_MODIFICATION
This flag disallows modifications to the text, extent or any other
properties of any buffers except those created after this flag was
set, just like in the previous entry.

@item OPERATION_NO_REDISPLAY
This bit flag inhibits any redisplay-related operations from
happening, more specifically, any entry into the redisplay-related
code.  This includes, for example, the Lisp functions sit-for,
force-redisplay, force-cursor-redisplay, window-end with certain
arguments to it, and various other functions. When this flag is
set, instead of entering the redisplay code, the calling function
should simply make sure not to enter the redisplay code, (for
example, in the case of window-end), or postpone the redisplay
until such a time when it's safe (for example, with sit-for and
force-redisplay).

@item OPERATION_NO_REDISPLAY_SETTINGS_CHANGE
This flag prohibits any modifications to faces, glyphs, specifiers,
extents, or any other settings that will affect the way that any
window is displayed.
@end table

The idea here is that it will finally be safe to call Lisp code from
nearly any part of the C code, simply by setting any combination of
restricted operation bit flags.  This even includes from within
redisplay. (in such a case, all of the bit flags need to be set).  The
reason that I thought of this is that some coding system translations
might cause Lisp code to be invoked and C code often invokes these
translations in sensitive places.

@c Indexing guidelines

@c I assume that all indexes will be combined.
@c Therefore, if a generated findex and permutations
@c cover the ways an index user would look up the entry,
@c then no cindex is added.
@c Concept index (cindex) entries will also be permuted.  Therefore, they
@c have no commas and few irrelevant connectives in them.

@c I tried to include words in a cindex that give the context of the entry,
@c particularly if there is more than one entry for the same concept.
@c For example, "nil in keymap"
@c Similarly for explicit findex and vindex entries, e.g. "print example".

@c Error codes are given cindex entries, e.g. "end-of-file error".

@c pindex is used for .el files and Unix programs

@node Index,  , Old Future Work, Top
@unnumbered Index

@ignore
All variables, functions, keys, programs, files, and concepts are
in this one index.  

All names and concepts are permuted, so they appear several times, one
for each permutation of the parts of the name.  For example,
@code{function-name} would appear as @b{function-name} and @b{name,
function-}.  Key entries are not permuted, however.
@end ignore

@c Print the indices

@printindex fn

@c Print the tables of contents
@summarycontents
@contents
@c That's all

@bye
