\input texinfo  @c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename ../info/m2ps
@settitle m2ps -- Converter from Mule code to PostScript

@titlepage
@sp 6
@center @titlefont{m2ps -- Converter from Mule code to PostScript}
@sp 4
@center Version 2.1
@sp 5
@center TAKAHASHI Naoto
@center ntakahas@@etl.go.jp
@page

@end titlepage

@node Top, , , (mule)
@chapter m2ps -- Converter from Mule code to PostScript

  A program called @code{m2ps} is bound to Mule.  m2ps works as a
filter.  It converts Mule's internal code to PostScript.  To print a
file, say, @file{mytext}, follow the instruction below:

@enumerate
@item
Type @kbd{C-x C-f mytext RET} to read the file in.

@item
Type @kbd{C-u C-x C-w tmp RET *internal* RET} to save the content
of the file with the internal representation of Mule.

@item
Return to a shell.  Then type the following command:

@example
@samp{% m2ps < tmp | lpr}
@end example
@end enumerate

  If your default printer does not accept PostScript, specify the name
of a PostScript printer with @samp{-P} option.  For example, if the name
of your PostScript printer is @samp{lw}, it should be as follows:

@example
@samp{% m2ps < tmp | lpr -Plw}
@end example

@chapter any2ps -- Converter from any code to PostScript

  A program called @code{any2ps} is inclued in @code{coco} package which
is distributed under `contrib' of Mule's FTP directory.  With this, you
don't have to convert your text to mule's internal coding-system
@code{*internal*}.  Here's the example of usage:

@example
@samp{% any2ps < text_file > ps_file}
@end example

@contents
@bye
