\input texinfo	@c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename ../info/terminology
@settitle TERMINOLOGY

@titlepage
@sp 6
@center @titlefont{TERMINOLOGY}
@sp 4
@center Version 2.0
@sp 5
@center Ken'ichi HANDA
@center handa@@etl.go.jp
@page

@end titlepage

@node Top, , , (mule)
@chapter Terminology

@menu
* WNN::                 Japanese Kana to Kanji translator
* CWNN::                Chinese PinYin/ZhuYin to Hanji translator
* EGG::                 Japanese/Chinese inputting methods which uses Wnn/cWnn
* SJ3::                 Japanese Kana to Kanji translator
* CANNA::               Japanese Kana to Kanji translator
* QUAIL::               Inputting method of multilingual characters
* TERMINAL EMULATOR::   Terminal emulators which runs on X
* ISO2022::             Code extension techniques (encoding mechanism) of ISO
* ECMA::                European Computer Manufacturers Association
@end menu

@node WNN
@section Japanese Kana to Kanji translator

Wnn consists of:
	jserver - a background server for translating Kana
		  string to Kanji-Kana mixed string.
	uum - a front end of jserver used on terminal.
	dictionary - quite big dictionary for the translation.

Wnn is distributed as a contribution software of X.V11R5
under the directory contrib/im/Xsi/Wnn.  The latest version
is 4.108.


@node CWNN
@section Chinese PinYin/ZhuYin to Hanji translator

cWnn consists of:
	cserver - a background server for translating
		  PinYin/ZhuYin string to Hanji string
		  (for GB encoding).
	tserver - a background server for translating
		  PinYin/ZhuYin string to Hanji string
		  (for Big-5 encoding).
	cuum - a front end of cserver used on terminal.
	dictionary - quite big dictionary for the translation.

cWnn is distributed as a contribution software of X.V11R5
under the directory contrib/im/Xsi/cWnn.  The latest version
is 4.108.


@node EGG
@section Japanese/Chinese inputting methods which uses Wnn/cWnn

EGG provides two levels of user interface, one is to enter
Kana/PinYin string from ASCII keyboard (ITS level), and the
other is to tranlate Kana/PinYin string to Kanji/Hanzi
string (TAKANA level) while communicating with
jserver/cserver.

Using EGG on Mule corresponds to using uum/cuum on
kterm/cxterm, both uses jserver/cserver as background, but
EGG provides much more convenient interface when you are
running Mule.


@node SJ3
@section Japanese Kana to Kanji translator

'sj3' translates Japanese Kana string to Kanji-Kana mixed
string.  'sj3' runs on Sony NEWS workstations.  

When Mule is installed with EGG and SJ3, EGG communicate
with sj3serv instead of jserver/cserver.


@node CANNA
@section Japanese Kana to Kanji translator

Canna converts kana to kanji based on a server-client model.
That is, an application program communicates with a
kana-to-kanji conversion server and achieves Japanese input.
Canna is distributed as a contribution software of X.V11R5
under the directory contrib/im/Canna.

When Mule is installed with CANNA, you can use Canna server
for inputting Japanese.


@node QUAIL
@section Inputting method of multilingual characters in Mule

Quail system is bundled with Mule (quail.el) and provides inputting
methods of various character sets (quail/xxx.el).
For European:
	quail/latin.elc, quail/greek.elc, quail/cyrillic.elc, quail/hebrew.elc
For Chinese (corresponds to cxterm's *.cit):
	quail/ccdospy.elc, quail/ctlau.elc, quail/etzy.elc, quail/punct-b5.elc,
	quail/punct.elc, quail/py-b5.elc, quail/py.elc, quail/qj-b5.elc,
	quail/qj.elc, quail/sw.elc, quail/tonepy.elc, quail/zozy.elc
For Korean:
	quail/hangul.elc, quail/hangul3.elc, quail/hanja-ksc.elc
For Japanese (tcode users):
	quail/tcode-dvorak.elc, quail/tcode-qwerty.elc


@node TERMINAL EMULATOR
@section kterm, cxterm, ixterm, exterm: Terminal emulators which runs on X

	kterm: Japanese version of 'xterm'.
	cxterm: Chinese version of 'xterm'.
	ixterm: European version of 'xterm'.
	exterm: multilingual version of 'xterm'.
			(Japanese/Chinese/Korean/European/et al)

Distributed as contribution softwares of X.V11R5 under the
directory contrib/clients.


@node ISO2022
@section Code extension techniques (encoding mechanism) of ISO

ISO2022 is the International Standard of character code
encoding techniques.  It defines how to encode character
sets registered by ECMA.  Here we gives a very short essence
of these techniques.  See mule/doc/ISO2022 for more information.


@node ECMA
@section European Computer Manufacturers Association

ECMA is engaged in administration of The International
Register for character sets.  Any character set can be a
candidate for registration so long as it satisfies the
technical requirements of ISO2022 and the format
requirements of ISO2375.

@contents
@bye
