\input texinfo	@c -*-texinfo-*-
@setfilename ../info/XFONT
@settitle X's FONT usage

@titlepage
@sp 6
@center @titlefont{X's FONT usage for novice users}
@sp 4
@center Version 2.0
@sp 5
@center Ken'ichi HANDA
@center handa@@etl.go.jp
@page

@end titlepage

@node Top, , , (mule)
@section X's FONT usage

This document descrives X's FONT usage for novice users.

@menu
* Font path::           How to set font path?
* Building fonts::      How to build new fonts?
* Getting fonts::       How to get fonts?
* Font selection: (mule) FONT.      Mule's font selection mechanism
@end menu

@node Font path, Building fonts, , Top
@section Setting font path

To run Mule as a client of X, X's font is required for each
character set (e.g. GB2312 [Chinese], JISX0208 [Japanese]).
The fonts you can use on your X server are listed by the
command @code{xlsfonts}.
@quotation
@code{% xlsfonts | egrep -i gb2312}
@end quotation
will show you fonts for Chinese (GB).
@quotation
@code{% xlsfonts | egrep -i jisx0208}
@end quotation
will show you fonts for Japanese.
@quotation
@code{% xlsfonts | egrep -i ksc5601}
@end quotation
will show you fonts for Korean.
@quotation
@code{% xlsfonts | egrep -i big5}
@end quotation
will show you fonts for Big5.

If you can't find necessary fonts, check your 'Font Path' by:
@quotation
@code{% xset q}
@end quotation

Under the default setting of X.V11R5, fonts for Japanese and
Korean are in the directory /usr/lib/X11/fonts/misc.  If
these directories are not in your Font Path, put them in by:
@quotation
@code{% xset fp+ /usr/lib/X11/fonts/misc}
@end quotation
If there are no such directories, you must create X's font
from BDF files by yourself @xref{Building fonts}.

Now, you can run Mule on X.  If you want to use different
fonts than defaults, you can specify them by command line
switch or your X's resource file (try `man mule' or look
into the file `mule/etc/mule.1').

@node Building fonts, Getting fonts, Font path, Top
@section Building fonts

X.V11R5 is distributed with many fonts (BDF format).  Those
are under X.V11R5/mit/fonts/bdf/misc:
@quotation
	jiskan16.bdf, jiskan24.bdf (Japanese)
	hanglm16.bdf, hanglm24.bdf (Korean)
@end quotation
and under X.V11R5/contrib/clients/cxterm/fonts:
@quotation
	cclib16st.bdf, cclib24st.bdf (Chinese GB)
	hku-ch16.bdf (Chinese Big5)
@end quotation
To create fonts from these files, you'd better make a
directory for them (say ${font}):
@example
	% mkdir ${font}
	% cd ${font}
	% bdftopcf xxx/jiskan24.bdf >jiskan24.pcf
	% bdftopcf yyy/hanglm24.bdf >hanglm24.pcf
	...
	% mkfontdir
	% xset fp+ `pwd`
@end example

Now you can check if you are really able to use these fonts by
'xlsfonts' command.  You must use 'bdftosnf' instead of
'bdftopcf' if you are using X.V11R4.

@node Getting fonts, , Building fonts, Top
@section How to get fonts?

Mule requires more fonts than in the distribution of
X.V11R5.  For instance, in the case of using EGG with cWnn's
cserver, font for SiSheng characters is necessary.  The
directory `fonts' under the ftp directory of Mule contains
those fonts.

@contents
@bye
