COPYING for Unicode Consortium mapping files in XEmacs.

Copyright (c) 2007  The Free Software Foundation, Inc.

This file is part of XEmacs.

XEmacs is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or (at your
option) any later version.

XEmacs is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but WITHOUT
ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of MERCHANTABILITY or
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU General Public License
for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with XEmacs.  If not, see <http://www.gnu.org/licenses/>.

Other files in this directory are subject to O'Reilly Media and
Unicode Consortium licenses.  The files oreilly.html and
unicode-consortium.html are not part of XEmacs; they are property of
O'Reilly Media, Inc. and Unicode, Inc. respectively.  They are
included here for informational purposes only, and may be
redistributed in verbatim form only.  These files were downloaded from
those vendors on January 28, 2007.  If you can't read them easily
(they probably require network connections for full functionality),
report a bug to XEmacs at <xemacs-beta@xemacs.org>.

The following files were copied from locations below
http://www.unicode.org/Public/MAPPINGS/OBSOLETE/EASTASIA/
and are covered by the Unicode Consortium copying permission contained
in http://www.unicode.org/copying.html.  A copy of that notice is in
unicode-consortium.html in this directory.  We believe this notice
supersedes the following notice which appears in the files:

  Recipient is granted the right to make copies in any form for
  internal distribution and to freely use the information supplied
  in the creation of products supporting Unicode.  Unicode, Inc.
  specifically excludes the right to re-distribute this file directly
  to third parties or other organizations whether for profit or not.

We are consulting the Unicode Consortium for confirmation.

BIG5.TXT     CNS11643.TXT
JIS0201.TXT  JIS0208.TXT  JIS0212.TXT  SHIFTJIS.TXT
JOHAB.TXT    KSX1001.TXT  OLD5601.TXT

The following file was copied from
http://examples.oreilly.com/cjkvinfo/unicode/gb12345-90.txt
and is covered by the O'Reilly Media copying policy in
http://www.oreilly.com/pub/a/oreilly/ask_tim/2001/codepolicy.html.
A copy of that notice is in oreilly.html in this directory.  This data
file is is an appendix to the book *Chinese, Japanese, Korean, and
Vietnamese Information Processing* by Ken Lunde, published by O'Reilly
Media (ISBN-13 978-1565922242).

GB12345.TXT

The following files are taken from locations below
http://www.unicode.org/Public/MAPPINGS/
and are covered by the conditions in Exhibit 1 of unicode.html in this
directory.

8859-1.TXT  8859-10.TXT 8859-13.TXT 8859-14.TXT 8859-15.TXT 8859-16.TXT
8859-2.TXT  8859-3.TXT  8859-4.TXT  8859-5.TXT  8859-6.TXT  8859-7.TXT
8859-8.TXT  8859-9.TXT  CP1250.TXT  CP1251.TXT  CP1252.TXT  CP1253.TXT
CP1254.TXT  CP1255.TXT  CP1256.TXT  CP1257.TXT  CP1258.TXT  CP874.TXT
CP932.TXT   CP936.TXT   CP949.TXT   CP950.TXT   GB2312.TXT  HANGUL.TXT
KOI8-R.TXT  KSC5601.TXT

