@c -*-texinfo-*-
@c This is part of the XEmacs Lisp Reference Manual.
@c Copyright (C) 1998 Oliver Graf <ograf@fga.de>
@c Original reference is (c) 1990, 1991, 1992, 1993, 1994 Free Software Foundation, Inc. 
@c See the file lispref.texi for copying conditions.
@setfilename ../../info/dragndrop.texi
@node Drag'n'Drop, Modes, Scrollbars, Top
@chapter Drag'n'Drop
@cindex drag'n'drop

  Drag'n'drop is a way to transfer information between multiple applications.
To do this serveral GUIs define their own protocols. Examples are OffiX, CDE,
Motif, KDE, MSWindows, GNOME, and many more. To catch all these protocols,
XEmacs provides a generic API.

@menu
* Supported Protocols:: Which low-level protocols are supported.
* Drop Interface::      How XEmacs handles a drop from another application.
* Drag Interface::      Calls to initiate a drag from XEmacs.
@end menu

@node Supported Protocols
@section Supported Protocols

The current release of XEmacs only support a small set of Drag'n'drop
protocols. Some of these only support limited options avaiable in the API.

@menu
* OffiX DND::           A generic X based protocol.
* CDE dt::              Common Desktop Environment used on suns.
* MSWindows OLE::       Mr. Gates way of live.
@end menu

@node OffiX DND
@subsection OffiX DND
@cindex OffiX DND

The OffiX Drag'n'Drop protocol is part of a X API/Widget library created by
Cesar Crusius. It is based on X-Atoms and ClientMessage events, and works with
any X platform supporting them.

OffiX is supported if 'offix is member of the variable dragdrop-protocols, or
the feature 'offix is defined.

XEmacs supports both MIME and URL drags and drops using this API. No application 
interaction is possible while dragging is in progress.

For infomation about the OffiX project have a look at http://leb.net/~offix/

@node CDE dt
@subsection CDE dt
@cindex CDE dt

to be written

@node MSWindows OLE
@subsection MSWindows OLE
@cindex MSWindows OLE

to be written

@node Drop Interface
@section Drop Interface
@cindex drop

This describes the drop API (under construction)

@node Drag Interface
@section Drag Interface

This describes the drag API (not implemented yet).
